Section 1 Conceptual frameworks

Chapter 1 Normal psychological development in adulthood
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-1
When adults develop psychological problems, such as depression, anxiety or other difficulties described later in this book, these problems
do not occur in a vacuum. They occur within the context of the family lifecycle. Challenges within the lifecycle may contribute to the
development of psychological problems and such difficulties may also compromise the capacity to complete important developmental tasks.
It is for this reason that the approach to the practice of adult clinical psychology outlined in this volume begins with a consideration of the
normal family lifecycle.
Family lifecycle
Most models of the family lifecycle are based upon the norm of the traditional nuclear family with other family forms being conceptualized
as deviations from this norm (McGoldrick et al., 2011). One such model is presented in Table 1.1. This model delineates the main tasks to be
completed by the family at each stage of development. After considering this model in some detail, other lifecycle models associated with
separation and divorce, living a single life, and gay and lesbian sexual orientation will also be considered.


Leaving home
In the first stage of family development, which is marked by young adult children leaving home and developing emotional and financial
autonomy, the principal tasks are differentiating from the family of origin, developing an adult-to-adult relationship with parents,
developing intimate peer relationships, beginning a career and moving towards financial independence, and establishing the self in
community and society.
Forming a couple
The second stage is that of couple formation, where the main process is commitment to a long-term relationship. The principal tasks include
selecting a partner and deciding to form a long-term relationship, developing a way to live together based on an appreciation of partners'
real strengths and weaknesses rather than mutual projection, and realigning couple's relationships with families of origin and peers so as to
accommodate partners.
Adams (1986) views mate selection as a complex process that involves four stages. In the first phase partners are selected from among
those available for interaction. At this stage people select mates who are physically attractive and similar to themselves in interests,
intelligence, personality and other valued behaviours and attributes. In the second phase there is a comparison of values following
revelation of identities through self-disclosing conversations. If this leads to a deepening of the original attraction then the relationship
will persist. In the third phase, there is an exploration of role compatibility and the degree to which mutual empathy is possible. Once
interlocking roles and mutual empathy have developed, the costs of separation begin to outweigh the difficulties and tensions associated
with staying together. If the attraction has deepened sufficiently and the barriers to separation are strong enough, consolidation of the
relationship occurs. In the fourth and final phase a decision is made about long-term compatibility and commitment. If a positive decision
is reached about both of these issues, then marriage or long-term cohabitation may occur. When partners come together they are effectively

bringing two family traditions together and setting the stage for the integration of these traditions with their norms and values, rules, roles
and routines into a new tradition.
Table 1.1 Stages of the family lifecycle
Stage
Leaving home
Emotional transition processes
Developing emotional and financial autonomy
Forming a couple
Committing to a long-term relationship
Families with young children Accepting new children into the family system
Tasks essential for developmental progression
Differentiating from family of origin and
developing adult-to-adult relationship with
parents
Developing intimate peer relationships
Beginning a career and moving towards financial
independence
Establishing the self in community and society
Selecting a partner and deciding to form a long-
term relationship
Developing a way to live together based on reality rather
than mutual projection
Realigning couple's relationships with families of origin
and peers to include partners
Adjusting couple system to make space for
children
Arranging child-rearing, financial and housekeeping
responsibilities within the couple
Realigning relationships with families of origin to include
parenting and grandparenting roles

Families with adolescents
Launching children and
moving into midlife
Families with parents in late
middle age
Increasing flexibility of family boundaries
to accommodate adolescents' growing
independence and grandparents' increasing
constraints
Accepting many exits from and entries into the
family system
Accepting new generational roles
Realigning family relationships with community and
society to accommodate new family structure
Adjusting parent-child relationships to allow
adolescents more autonomy
Adjusting family relationships as couple takes on
responsibility of caring for aging parents
Realigning family relationships with community and
society to accommodate adolescents' increasing autonomy
and grandparents' increasing constraints
Adjusting to living as a couple again
Addressing couple's midlife issues and possibilities of new
interests and projects
Negotiating adult-to-adult relationships between parents
and grown children
Adjusting to include in-laws and grandchildren within the
family circle
Dealing with disabilities and death of couple's aging
parents
Realigning family relationships with community and
society to accommodate new family structure and
relationships
Maintaining couple's functioning and interests,
and exploring new family and social roles while
coping with physiological decline
Adjusting to children taking a more central role in family
maintenance
Making room for the wisdom and experience of the aging
couple
Supporting the older generation to live as independently
as possible within the constraints of aging

Realigning family relationships with community and
society to accommodate new family structure and
relationships
Families with parents nearing Accepting the constraints of aging and the reality Dealing with loss of partner, siblings and peers
the end of life
of death
Preparing for death through life review and integration
Adjusting to reversal of roles where children care for
parents
Realigning family relationships with community and
society to accommodate changing family relationships
Note: Adapted from McGoldrick et al. (2011).
Couple formation and marriage entail the development of a series of important relationships: the marital relationship, kinship relationships
and later parent-child relationships, all of which have the potential to contribute to happiness and well-being (Carr, 2011). Marriage and
psychological adjustment are intimately linked (Carr, 2012). Psychological disorders can both cause marital conflict, and such conflict can
contribute to the aetiology and maintenance of psychological difficulties.
Marital satisfaction
The following demographic factors are associated with marital satisfaction (Conger et al., 2010; Fincham & Beach, 2010; Gottman &
Notarius, 2002; Newman & Newman, 2015):
• High level of education
• High socio-economic status
• Similarity of spouses' interests, intelligence and personality
• Early or late stage of family lifecycle

• Sexual compatibility
• For women, later marriage.
The precise mechanisms linking these factors to marital satisfaction are not fully understood. However, the following speculations seem
plausible. Higher educational level and higher socio-economic status probably lead to greater marital satisfaction because where these
factors are present people probably have better problem-solving skills and fewer chronic life stresses such as crowding. Although there is a
cultural belief that opposites attract, the research results show that similarity is associated with marital satisfaction, probably because of
the greater ease with which similar people can empathize with each other and pursue shared interests. Marital satisfaction drops during
the child-rearing years and satisfaction is highest before children are born and when they leave home. During these periods, it may be that
greater satisfaction occurs because partners can devote more time and energy to joint pursuits and there are fewer opportunities for conflict
involving child management. Most surveys find wide variability in the frequency with which couples engage in sexual activity but confirm
that it is sexual compatibility rather than frequency of sexual activity that is associated with marital satisfaction.
Marital interaction
Studies of belief systems and interaction patterns of well-adjusted couples show that they have distinctive features (Casey et al., 2010;
Fincham et al., 2007; Gottman & Notarius, 2002; Gurman, 2008; Ozer & Benet-Martínez, 2006). These include:
• Respect
• Acceptance
• Commitment
• Spirituality

• Dispositional attributions for positive behaviour
• More positive than negative interactions
• Focusing conflicts on specific issues
• Rapidly repairing relationship ruptures and forgiving transgressions
• Managing differing male and female conversational styles
• Addressing needs for intimacy and power
• Emotional intelligence, emotional stability and agreeableness.
Happy couples tend to attribute their partners' positive behaviours to dispositional rather than situational factors. For example, 'She
helped me because she is such a kind person,' not 'She helped me because it was convenient at the time.' The ratio of positive to negative
exchanges has been found to be about 5:1 in happy couples (Gottman, 1993). So even though happy couples have disagreements, this is
balanced out by five times as many positive interactions. When happy couples disagree, they focus their disagreement on a specific issue
rather than globally criticizing or insulting their partner. This type of behaviour is a reflection of a general attitude of respect which
characterizes happy couples. Happy couples tend to rapidly repair their relationship ruptures arising from conflict. Where transgressions
occur and one partner is hurt, there is a willingness to forgive, and to prevent long episodes of non-communication, sulking or stonewalling
to occur (Fincham et al., 2007). Sometimes happy couples resolve conflicts by agreeing to differ. The specific process of agreeing to differ
reflects a general attitude of acceptance. There is good evidence that men and women have different conversational styles, and these
differences are probably determined more by social than biological factors (Cameron, 2010). Men use conversation predominantly to convey
task-focused information and to resolve task-related problems. Women use conversation predominantly to make and maintain
relationships. In their communication with each other, happy couples find ways to manage these differing conversational styles so that
psychological intimacy may be fostered rather than compromised. So males in such relationships make efforts to use conversation to make

and maintain their relationship with their partner and females are tolerant of the challenge that this poses. Difficulties and disagreements
about communication and intimacy on the one hand, and the power balance or role structure of the relationship on the other, are central
themes for distressed couples (Gurman, 2008). With respect to intimacy, usually males demand greater psychological distance and females
insist on greater psychological intimacy. With respect to power, males commonly wish to retain the power and benefits of traditional gender
roles while females wish to evolve more egalitarian relationships. In happy couples, partners' needs for intimacy and power within the
relationship are adequately met, and partners have the capacity to negotiate with each other about modifying the relationship if they feel
that these needs are being thwarted. This process reflects a commitment to place the long-term viability of the relationship ahead of
personal concerns (Fincham et al., 2007). Marital stability is associated with religious or spiritual affiliation. Couples who conceptualize their
relationship within a broader religious or spiritual context or tradition have more stable marriages (Fincham et al., 2007). Emotional
intelligence, emotional stability and agreeableness are personality characteristics that are associated with marital satisfaction (Casey et al.,
2010; Ozer & Benet-Martínez, 2006). This may be because stable, agreeable people with high emotional intelligence select partners who also
have these attributes. It may also be because stable, agreeable people with high emotional intelligence are better equipped to perceive and
understand their own and their partners' emotions; to use this information to enhance their relationships and solve relationship problem;
and to regulate their emotions so as to maximize relationship satisfaction.
Types of marriages
Fitzpatrick (1988) and Gottman (1993) have both identified three types of stable satisfactory marriages in questionnaire and observational
studies. I have termed these traditional, androgynous and avoidant couples. Characteristics of these types of marriage are summarized in
the first part of Table 1.2. Traditional couples adopt traditional sex roles and lifestyles and take a low-key approach to conflict management.
Androgynous couples strive to create egalitarian roles and take a fiery approach to conflict resolution. Avoidant couples adopt traditional
sex roles but live parallel lives and avoid conflict. Two types of unstable couples were identified in Gottman's (1993) study. In Table 1.2, I

have labelled these conflictual and disengaged couples. The former engage in conflict but without resolution, and the latter avoid conflict
much of the time. Gottman found that in all three stable types of couples the ratio of positive to negative verbal exchanges during conflict
resolution was 5:1. For both unstable types of couples the ratio of positive to negative exchanges was approximately 1:1. Gottman's and
Fitzpatrick's work highlights the fact that there are a number of possible models for a stable marital relationship. Their work also underlines
the importance of couples engaging in conflict with a view to resolving it rather than avoiding conflict. Negativity is only destructive if it
is not balanced out by five times as much positivity. Indeed, negativity may have a prosocial role in balancing the needs for intimacy and
autonomy and in keeping attraction alive over long periods.
Intimate partner violence
Violence within intimate relationships is common. In a review of international community surveys Alhabib et al. (2010) found that while
there was considerable variability in rates of domestic violence across countries and ethnic groups, the average rate was about 30%. Intimate
partner violence is a multifactorial phenomenon, and characteristics of the abuser, the victim, the marital relationship and the wider social
context have all been found to contribute to the occurrence and maintenance of the cycle of violence (Frude, 1990; Holtzworth-Munroe et
al., 2002; O'Leary, 2008). A personal history of abuse, a high level of the personality trait of aggressiveness, strong conservative attitudes,
beliefs in traditional sex roles, low self-esteem, poor social skills, depression, antisocial personality disorder, alcohol abuse and morbid
jealousy have all been found to characterize abusers. Victims, quite understandably, have been found to be retaliative and to use verbal and
physical abuse during conflict resolution. Thus intimate partner violence evolves into a reciprocal phenomenon. However, the negative
physical and psychological consequences of domestic violence are greater for women than for men. Intimate relationships in which
domestic violence occur are typically characterized by a history of multiple separations, a low level of commitment and little relationship
satisfaction. There is commonly conflict about intimacy, with women demanding more psychological intimacy and men demanding more
physical intimacy. Many rows are about not enough 'talking and empathy' from the woman's perspective and not enough sex from the man's.


There is also conflict about power, with the woman having higher status than the man and the man believing in a model of marriage where
the male has more power. Many disagreements are about money, and this reflects the disagreement about power. Poor communication and
negotiation skills characterize these couples so they cannot resolve their conflicts about intimacy and power. Because they cannot
communicate about what they want from each other, they make negative inferences and assumptions about their partners' intentions and
respond to their partners as if these inferences were accurate. This results in a blaming stance rather than an understanding stance. They
also believe that arguments must involve winners and losers, and therefore in all conflicts they escalate the exchange so that they can win.
They believe in a win-lose model of conflict resolution, not a win-win model. They work on a short-term quid pro quo system, not a long-
term goodwill system. This results in attempts to control each other by punishment, not reward.
Table 1.2 Five types of couples
Stability Type
Characteristics
Stable Traditional couples
• They adopt traditional sex roles
• They privilege family goals over individual goals
• They have regular daily schedules
• They share the living space in the family home
• They express moderate levels of both positive and negative emotions
• They tend to avoid conflict about all but major issues
• They engage in conflict and try to resolve it

Androgynous couples
• At the outset of an episode of conflict resolution, each partner listens to the other and
empathizes with their position
• In the later part there is considerable persuasion
• They adopt androgynous egalitarian roles
They privilege individual goals over family goals
• They have chaotic daily schedules
• They have separate living spaces in their homes
• They express high levels of positive and negative emotions
• They tend to engage in continual negotiation about many issues
• Partners disagree and try to persuade one another from the very beginning of episodes of
conflict resolution
• A high level of both positive and negative emotions
Avoidant couples
• They adopt traditional sex roles
• They have separate living spaces in their homes
• They avoid all conflict
• They have few conflict resolution skills

• Partners state their case when a conflict occurs but there is no attempt at persuasion or
compromise
• They accept differences about specific conflicts as unimportant compared with their shared
common ground and values
• Conflict-related discussions are unemotional
Unstable Conflictual couples
• They engage in conflict without any constructive attempt to resolve it
• Continual blaming, mind-reading, and defensiveness characterize their interactions
• High levels of negative emotion and little positive emotion are expressed
• Attack-withdraw interaction pattern

Disengaged couples
• They avoid conflict and have few conflict resolution skills
• Brief episodes of blaming, mind-reading, and defensiveness characterize their interactions
• Low levels of negative emotion and almost no positive emotion is expressed
• Withdraw-withdraw interaction pattern

Note: Based on Fitzpatrick (1988) and Gottman (1993).


This destructive relational style is more likely to escalate into violence if certain broader contextual factors are present. Violence is more
likely where couples live in crowded living conditions, are unemployed, live in poverty, have a low educational level, are socially isolated and
have experienced many recent life changes and stresses. With crowding, unemployment and poverty, couples struggle for access to their
own limited resources and displace aggression towards societal forces that have trapped them in poverty onto each other. Better educated
couples use more sophisticated negotiation skills to prevent conflict escalation. Social isolation increases stress and reduces social support.
This stress may lead to heightened arousal and so increase the risk of violence. Also, abusive couples may deliberately isolate themselves
so that the abuse is not uncovered, or may inadvertently become isolated which reduces the chances of the abuse being detected. Major life
changes may lead to increased cohesion in some couples and increased conflict in others. Moving house, the birth of a baby and redundancy
are examples of transitions that may lead to domestic violence. Psychological intervention for couples involved in violence focuses on both
risk assessment and helping couples evolve alternatives to violence (Cooper & Vetere, 2005; Holtzworth-Munroe et al., 2002; O'Leary, 2008;
Stith et al., 2005).
Families with young children
In the third stage of the family lifecycle model given in Table 1.1, the main tasks are for couples to adjust their roles within their
relationship to make space for young children; for couples' parents to develop grandparental roles; for children as they move into middle
childhood to develop peer relationships; and for families to arrange day care, preschool and school placements for their children in their
communities. Each of these issues will be dealt with in more detail later. During this lifecycle stage couples must also arrange for a workable
division of labour in terms of child-rearing, financial and housekeeping responsibilities. In this domain, most research studies in Western
industrialized countries show that this is an area marked by inequity. Men tend to do more paid work outside the home than women; women
tend to do more housework and childcare, even when they work outside the home; and men have more leisure time than women (Bianchi &
Milkie, 2010). The increased stress associated with women's role may lead to referral to clinical psychologists.


The development of positive parenting roles involves couples establishing routines for meeting children's needs for
• Safety
• Care
• Control
• Intellectual stimulation.
Developing these routines is a complex process. Routines for meeting children's needs for safety include protecting children from
accidents by, for example, not leaving young children unsupervised and also developing skills for managing frustration and anger that
the demands of parenting young children often elicit. Routines for providing children with food and shelter, attachment, empathy,
understanding and emotional support must be developed to meet children's needs for care in these various areas. Routines for setting clear
rules and limits; for providing supervision to ensure that children conform to these expectations; and for offering appropriate rewards
and sanctions for rule following and rule violations meet children's need for control. Parent-child play and communication routines for
meeting children's needs for age-appropriate intellectual stimulation also need to be developed if the child is to show optimal emotional and
intellectual development.
The parenting process and parental mental health are closely linked. The demands of meeting children's needs, particularly if parents have
high level of stress and low levels of social support, may contribute to the development of psychological disorders such as depression (Brown,
2009). Also, where parents have a psychological disorder they may have difficulty meeting their children's needs, and this may adversely
affect their children's development (Stein et al., 2008).


Attachment styles
Adults who as children had secure attachments to their caregivers are at lower risk of mental health problems than those who did not
(Cassidy & Shaver, 2008). Children develop secure emotional attachments to their parents if their parents are attuned to their needs for
safety, security and being physically cared for and if their parents are responsive to children's signals that they require their needs to be met.
Where caregiver's are attuned to infants' needs and meet them reliably, infants develop an internal working model of their caregiver as a
secure base from which to explore the world and so show considerable confidence in doing so. Where caregivers fail to meet their infants'
needs in a reliable way, infants develop internal working models of their caregivers as unreliable and a view of themselves as insecure. Four
attachment styles, which have evolved from Bowlby's (1988) seminal work, are presented in Figure 1.1. These attachment styles show
continuity over the lifecycle and affect the way adult romantic attachments are formed. They also affect the way families are organized.
Child, adult and family attachment styles and related parenting styles are all given in Figure 1.1. Securely attached children and marital
partners react to their parents or partners as if they were a secure base from which to explore the world. Parents and partners in such
relationships are attuned and responsive to the children's or partners' needs. Families in which couples have secure romantic attachments
tend to be adaptable. While a secure attachment style is associated with personal autonomy and family adaptability, the other three
attachment styles are associated with a sense of insecurity. Anxiously attached children seek contact with their parents following separation
but are unable to derive comfort from it. They cling and cry or have tantrums. This pattern tends to develop where parents are intermittently
available. Marital partners with this attachment style tend to be overly close but dissatisfied, and their families tend to be enmeshed.
Avoidantly attached children avoid contact with their parents after separation. They sulk. This pattern tends to develop where parents reject
their children. Marital partners with this attachment style tend to be distant and dissatisfied, and their families tend to be disengaged.
Children with a disorganized attachment style show aspects of both the anxious and avoidant patterns. Disorganized attachment is a
common correlate of child abuse and neglect and early parental absence, loss or bereavement. Disorganized marital and family relationships


are characterized by approach-avoidance conflicts, disorientation and alternate clinging and sulking. Secure attachment is a central feature
of resilience in the face of adversity (Cassidy & Shaver, 2008). Children who face difficult challenges, who are stretched to the limits of their
coping capacity and who are offered sustained social support from their attachment figures are strengthened by their experience of
adversity and show marked resilience. In contrast, children exposed to repeated challenges, stresses, difficulties and problematic situations
that exceed their coping capacity in the absence of social support from their attachment figures develop psychological problems in later life.
High
Negative
AVOIDANCE
MODEL OF OTHER
Low
Positive
Low
Positive
ANXIETY
MODEL OF SELF
High
Negative
SECURE - CHILD
SECURE - ADULT
Secure
Child is autonomous
Adult is autonomous
Parenting is responsive
Family style is adaptable
Style B
ANXIOUS AMBIVALENT - CHILD
PREOCCUPIED - ADULT
Insecure
Child is angry/clingy
Adult is preoccupied
Parenting is intermittently available
Family style is enmeshed
Style C
AVOIDANT - CHILD
DISMISSING - ADULT
Insecure
Child is avoidant
Adult is distant
Parenting is rejecting
Family style is disengaged
Style A
DISORGANIZED - CHILD
FEARFUL - ADULT
Insecure
Child is clingy/avoidant
Adult has approach/avoidance conflicts
Parenting is abusive or absent
Family style is disoriented
Style D or A/C

Figure 1.1 Attachment styles
Note: Adapted from Carr (2012).
Parenting styles
Reviews of the extensive literature on parenting suggest that by combining the two orthogonal dimensions of warmth and control four
parenting styles may be identified, and each of these is associated with particular developmental outcomes for the child (Darling &
Steinberg, 1993). Authoritative parents who adopt a warm, accepting child-centred approach coupled with a moderate degree of control,
which allows children to take age-appropriate responsibility, provide a context that is maximally beneficial for children's development as
autonomous confident individuals. Children of parents who use an authoritative style learn that conflicts are most effectively managed
by taking the other person's viewpoint into account within the context of an amicable negotiation. This set of skills is conducive to
efficient joint problem solving and the development of good peer relationships and consequently the development of a good social support
network. This parenting style is also conducive to good moral development. Children of authoritarian parents who are warm, accepting
but controlling tend to develop into shy adults who are reluctant to take initiative. The parents' disciplinary style teaches them that
unquestioning obedience is the best way to manage interpersonal differences and to solve problems. Children of permissive parents who
are warm and accepting but lax in discipline lack the competence in later life to follow through on plans and show poor impulse control.
Children who have experienced little warmth or acceptance from their parents and who have been either harshly disciplined or had little or
inconsistent supervision may develop psychological problems as adults.
Supportive grandparental roles
In addition to developing parental roles and routines for meeting children's needs, a further task of the third stage of the family lifecycle
model in Table 1.1 is the development of positive grandparental roles and the realignment of family relationships that this entails. In their

wide-ranging review, Thiele and Whelan (2006) concluded that the grandparental role is typically meaningful and satisfying, probably
because it provides an avenue for individuals to meet their needs for generativity. There is considerable variability in the way different
grandparents fulfil their roles. This has led to a range of different typologies. For example, Neugarten and Weinstein (1964) identified a
number of different types of grandparental roles. First there were those that adopted a formal role and were not involved in childcare
but loving and emotionally involved with the grandchildren. The second role was essentially fun-seeking and these grandparents acted as
playmates for the grandchildren. The third type of grandparental role was that of a distant figure who had little contact with grandchildren.
The fourth role type was that of parental surrogate and these grandparents assume the role of parent to the grandchildren so that the mother
could work outside the home. The final grandparental role was that of a reservoir of family wisdom who occupied a powerful patriarchal
or matriarchal position within the extended family. Where grandparents adopt roles that are supportive of parents and grandchildren, they
contribute to family resilience. Where they adopt roles that greatly increase the demands on parents and grandchildren without offering
support, then they may contribute to parental psychological problems.
Families with adolescents
In the fourth stage of the family lifecycle model, which is marked by children's entry into adolescence, parent-child relationships require
realignment to allow adolescents to develop more autonomy. Concurrently, demands of caring for aging grandparents may occur. This is an
extremely complex and demanding stage of the family lifecycle, particularly for parents, where there is a need to realign family relationships
to accommodate adolescents' increasing independence and grandparents' increasing constraints. The demands of this period may lead to or
exacerbate parental psychological disorders.
Youth mental health problems
About one in five adolescents or young adults develops significant mental health problems (Costello et al., 2011). About three-quarters of


adult mental health problems have their onset during late adolescence or early adulthood (Jones, 2013). These findings have inspired the
development of youth mental health as a new specialty within the field of mental health service development. Services for teenagers and
adults in the family lifecycle stages for families with adolescents and families with adolescents leaving home should be designed to meet the
needs of this vulnerable group (McGorry, 2015).
Resilience in adolescence
Factors which characterize resilient adolescents are summarized in Table 1.3. Adolescents are more likely to show good adjustment if they
have a high level of intellectual ability, an easy temperament and positive personality traits which include emotional stability (or low
neuroticism), extraversion, conscientiousness and agreeableness. A high level of self-esteem, an optimistic attributional style, a general
belief in control over one's life and a specific belief that factors related to specific stresses may be controlled (high self-efficacy) are all
associated with good adjustment. These traits and positive belief systems probably render youngsters less vulnerable to becoming overly
physiologically aroused and aggressive or demoralized and depressed when faced with life stresses. Adolescents are less adversely affected by
life stresses if they have good planning skills, a sense of humour and the capacity to empathize with others. All of these coping skills can help
youngsters detach from deviant or incapacitated attachment figures (such as criminal or incapacitated parents) and deviant peers and seek
out more resourceful and prosocial attachment figures and peers. Selecting or creating a positive social network (through marriage, positive
school experiences, good friendships or talented performance in sports or arts) can halt negative chain reactions or start positive chain
reactions that facilitate personal development. Secure attachment relationships to primary caregivers who adopt an authoritative parenting
style and the involvement of both mothers and fathers in parenting are the major positive family factors associated with adolescents'
adjustment to life stress. The absence of childhood separations, losses, bereavements, parental mental health problems, criminality and
marital discord also characterize the families of children who are resilient in the face of stress. Better adjustment to life stress occurs when


adolescents come from higher socio-economic groups, have good social support networks consisting of family members and peers and
attend schools that provide a supportive yet challenging educational environment.
Table 1.3 Factors associated with resilience in adolescence
Domain
Factors
Psychological traits
• High ability level
• Easy temperament
• Positive personality traits (emotional stability, extraversion, conscientiousness and agreeableness)
Self-evaluative beliefs
• High self-esteem
• Internal locus of control
• Task related self-efficacy
• Optimistic attributional style
Coping skills
• Planning skills
• Sense of humour
Empathy skills


• Skill in detaching from deviant attachment figures and peer groups
• Skill in finding or creating a social supportive network
• Skill in using unique talents (e.g. sport or music) to create social supportive network and avoid
deviant network
Family factors
• Absence of early separation or losses
• Secure attachment
• Authoritative parenting
• Father involvement
Community factors
• Positive educational experience
• Good social support network (including good peer relationships, and involvement in organized
religious activity)
• High socio-economic status
Note: Based on Carr (2011), Goldstein & Brooks (2013), Komro et al. (2011), Lamb (2012), Masten (2013), Rutter (2013), Rutter & Maughan (2002), Ungar et al.
(2013) and Zolkoski & Bullock (2012).
Grandparental care
Increasingly, as the average lifespan lengthens, the responsibility of caring for aging parents is becoming a routine responsibility for

men and women in midlife (Connidis, 2010). The responsibility of caring for aging parents typically coincides with the responsibility of
rearing adolescent children and helping them make the transition to adulthood. It is therefore not surprising that people with these dual
responsibilities are sometimes referred to as the 'sandwich generation'. For this generation it is undoubtedly a challenging period in the
lifecycle. Social support from family and friends and periodic relief/custodial care are important coping resources in dealing with these
issues. In the absence of such supports the risk of psychological disorder increases.
Launching
The fifth stage of the family lifecycle model in Figure 1.1 is concerned with the transition of young adult children out of the parental home.
For young people and their parents this can be a very positive process that creates the context for developing less hierarchical relationships.
When adult children leave home, for parents there are both challenges and opportunities. There are opportunities to re-evaluate their lives,
reinvest in the marital relationship, and celebrate the expansion of the family if their adult children marry and procreate. There is also the
challenge of dealing with disabilities and death in their families of origin.
Midlife re-evaluation
As adolescents grow up and begin to leave home, parents have the opportunity to engage in a midlife re-evaluation, to consider their life
priorities, their marital relationship and their career aspirations. This process, which may have begun in the previous lifecycle stage, takes
on considerable momentum as the family home empties. Just as the notion of the universality of adolescent rebellion has not been supported
by the results of carefully conducted community-based surveys, so also the popular conception of the midlife crisis has been found to be a
relatively rare phenomenon (McAdams & Cox, 2010). Longitudinal studies show that many men and women in their forties become more
introspective and re-evaluate their roles within the family and the world of work. For men there may be a shift in values with an increased

valuing of family life over work life. For women there may be an increased emphasis on work over family. However, these changes in values
rarely lead to changes that assume crisis proportions.
Gould (1981) has shown in an extensive study of clinical and non-clinical populations that the assumptions and belief systems learned
within the family of origin are challenged in a gradual way over the course of adulthood and this process reaches a resolution in midlife.
Gould's findings are summarized in Table 1.4. The assumptions of childhood give a sense of safety and security. They include a belief in
omnipotent thought, a belief in omnipotent protective parents, a belief in the absoluteness of the parent's world view, and defences against
a rage reaction to separation. Adult consciousness on the other hand is governed by an acceptance that we create our own lives according to
beliefs and values that are different from those internalized in childhood.
Table 1.4 False assumptions challenged in adulthood
Period
False assumption
Belief systems
Late teens I will always belong to my parents and believe in their
world.
• If I get any more independent it will be a disaster
• I can only see the world through my parents'
assumptions
• Only they can guarantee my safety
• They must be my only family
• I don't own my body

Twenties
Thirties
Forties
Doing it their way will bring results and they will guide me
through difficulties.
Life is simple and controllable. There are no significant
coexisting contradictory forces within me.
There is no evil in me or death in the world. The sinister has
been expelled.
• If I follow the rules, I will be rewarded
• There is only one right way to do things
• Rationality, commitment and effort will always prevail
over other forces
• My partner will do those things for me that I cannot do
for my self (i.e. give me a love cure)
• What I know intellectually, I know emotionally
• I am not like my parents in ways that I don't want to be
• I can see the reality of those close to me clearly
• I can realistically identify and deal with threats to my
security
• My work or my relationships grant me immunity from
death and danger
• There is no life beyond this family
• I am innocent

Note: Based on Gould (1981).

In the late teens, if the adolescent is to be liberated from the family, the parent's world view must be appraised. Their parents' roles as
protectors must be evaluated and their command over the youth's sexuality and body must be challenged. The conflict is between retaining
a childhood role and trying out new roles. In the twenties, within the work arena, the idea that life is fair and if you stick to the rules you
will win is challenged. With relationships, the idea that our partners can make up for our deficiencies and we can make up for theirs is also
challenged here. The idea that love can cure personal deficiencies must be given up during the twenties. For example, a talkative partner can't
make up for a quiet partner's style nor can a nurturant partner fulfil all their partner's dependency needs. When these assumptions have
been challenged the person is in a position to differentiate sufficiently to establish a family separate from the family of origin.
The assumptions that are challenged up to the twenties relate to the outer world. In the thirties, assumptions about our inner selves or
our relationships with ourselves are challenged. The person realizes that one can know something intellectually such as 'this row with my
partner can be resolved through patient negotiation' and yet lack the emotional knowledge to work through the process of negotiation. In
the thirties, people realize that they have many characteristics of their parents which they dislike. For example, they may treat their children
unfairly. This has to be recognized if patterns are not to be repeated across generations. There must be an acceptance of a partner's evolution
and growth and the fact that we cannot assume that we see their point of view today just because we saw it a year ago. There are many threats
to security in midlife both within marriage and the workplace. Perceived threats within marriage are often projections rather than realistic
threats. People in their thirties assume that the feelings of being mistreated or taken for granted are real threats from their partners rather
than projections onto their partners of ways in which they were treated as children by their parents or significant others. The belief that we
can always identify and deal with threats accurately must be challenged in midlife.

In the forties illusions of safety are challenged. For men, the most common illusion is 'If I am successful I will never be frightened again.'
For women the most widespread illusion is 'I cannot be safe without a man to protect me.' When these illusions are challenged, both men and
women are freed from slavish adherence to career or marital roles to make the best use of their remaining years with an awareness of their
mortality in mind. Within marriage, both husbands and wives must challenge the belief that there is no life outside the marriage. This may
lead to them choosing to separate or choosing consciously to live together. The choice to remain married enriches the marriage. In midlife
there must be a reappraisal of the idea that we are innocent, since this is usually a defence against the childhood tendency to label certain
emotional states as bad or unacceptable. There is an examination of how we label these emotional experiences rather than a continued
attempt to try to deny them. For example:
• Anger need not be labelled as destructiveness.
• Pleasure need not be labelled as irresponsibility.
• Sensuality need not be labelled as sinfulness.
• Wicked thoughts need not entail wicked actions.
• Dissatisfaction need not be labelled as greed.
• Love need not be labelled as weakness.
• Self-concern need not be labelled as selfishness.
When these aspects of the self are relabelled rather than denied and integrated into the conscious self a process of liberation and increased
psychological vitality occurs. For Gould (1981), at the end of the midlife period the adult experiences a consciousness where the guiding
belief is 'I own myself' rather than 'I am theirs.' The sense of self-ownership gives life meaning. Where individuals have difficulty letting go
of childhood assumptions and moving towards adult consciousness, psychological problems may develop.

Later life
In the penultimate and final stages of the family lifecycle model in Table 1.1, families are concerned with parents' physiological decline
and approaching death (Connidis, 2010; Stroebe et al., 2008). On the positive side, these stages of the lifecycle afford aging parents an
opportunity to review all that they have done in their lives, to receive care and attention from their children and grandchildren, and to
savour the simple pleasures that each new day brings. For children and grandchildren there is an opportunity to benefit from the wisdom
and experience of the elderly. However, there are also many difficult challenges in these final stages of the lifecyle associated with loss. Loss
in this context refers to loss of aging parents' youth, health, vitality, resources and ultimately loss of life. A parallel issue for families is the
process of caring for parents as disability and illness compromise their capacity for self-care, and developing new roles and relationships
after their death. During these lifecycle stages, when dealing with terminal illness or bereavement, families may be referred for therapy
because one or more of their members display adjustment difficulties such as those listed in Table 1.5. These types of problems typically
reflect involvement in the following grief processes:
• Shock
• Denial or disbelief
• Yearning and searching
Sadness
• Anger
• Anxiety
Guilt and bargaining
• Acceptance

Table 1.5 Behavioural expressions of themes underlying grief processes following bereavement or facing terminal illness that may
lead to referral
Grief process
Bereavement
Terminal Illness
Underlying theme
Behavioural expressions of
grief processes that may lead to
referral
Underlying theme
Behavioural expressions
of grief processes that may
lead to referral
Shock
• I am stunned by
the loss of this
person.
• Complete lack of affect
and difficulty engaging
emotionally with others
• Poor concentration
• I am stunned by
my prognosis and
loss of health.
Denial
• The person is not
dead.
• Reporting seeing or hearing
the deceased
• Carrying on conversations
with the deceased
• Complete lack of affect
and difficulty engaging
emotionally with others
• Poor concentration
• I am not
• Non-compliance with
terminally ill.
medical regime

Yearning and
searching
• I must find the
deceased.
• Wandering or running away
• Phoning relatives
• I will find a miracle
cure.
• Experimentation with
alternative medicine
Sadness
• I am sad, hopeless
and lonely
because I have lost
someone on whom
I depended.
• Persistent low mood,
tearfulness, low energy and
lack of activity
• Appetite and sleep disruption
• Poor concentration and poor
schoolwork
• I am sad and
hopeless because I
know I will die.
• Giving up the fight
against illness
• Persistent low mood,
tearfulness, low energy
and lack of activity
• Appetite and sleep
disruption
• Poor concentration
Anger
• I am angry
because the person
I needed has
abandoned me.
• Aggression
• Conflict with family, friends
and colleagues
• Drug or alcohol misuse
• Poor concentration
• I am angry because
it's not fair. I
should be allowed
to live.
• Non-compliance with
medical regime
• Conflict with medical
staff, family, friends and
colleagues
• Drug or alcohol misuse
• Poor concentration

Anxiety
• I am frightened
that the deceased
will punish me for
causing their death
or being angry at
them. I am afraid
that I too may die
of an illness or
fatal accident.
• Separation anxiety
agoraphobia and panic
• Somatic complaints,
hypochondriasis and
agoraphobia associated with
a fear of accidents
• Poor concentration
• I am frightened
that death will
be painful or
terrifying.
• Separation anxiety with
regressed behaviour
• Agoraphobia and panic
Guilt and
bargaining
• It is my fault that
the person died so I
should die.
• Suicidal behaviour
• I will be good if I
am allowed to live.
• Overcompliance with
medical regime
Acceptance
• I loved and lost the
person who died
and now I must
carry on without
them while
• Return to normal behavioural
routines
• I know that I have
only a short time
left to live.
• Attempts to live life to
the full for the remaining
time

cherishing their
memory.
There is not a clear-cut progression through these processes from one to the next (Stroebe & Schut, 2001; Stroebe et al., 2008, 2013; Walsh
& McGoldrick, 2004). Rather, at different points in time, one or other process predominates. There may also be movement back and forth
between processes. All of the processes may give rise to problems significant enough to lead to a referral for psychological treatment.
Shock and denial
Shock is the most common initial reaction. It can take the form of physical pain, numbness, apathy or withdrawal. The person may appear to
be stunned and unable to think clearly. This may be accompanied by denial, disbelief or avoidance of the reality of the bereavement, a process
that can last minutes, days, even months. During denial people may behave as if the dead family member is still living, albeit elsewhere.
Thus, the bereaved may speak about future plans that involve the deceased. Terminally ill people may talk about themselves and their future
as if they were going to live indefinitely.
Yearning and searching
A yearning to be with the deceased, coupled with disbelief about their death, may lead to frantic quests for the person who has died. During
this process those who have lost family members may report seeing them or being visited by them. Mistaking other people for the deceased
is also a common experience during the denial process. With terminal illness, the yearning for health may lead to a search for a miracle cure
and to involvement in alternative medicine.

Sadness
When denial gives way to a realization of the reality of death, profound sadness, despair, hopelessness and depression may occur. The
experience of sadness may be accompanied by low energy, sleep disruption, a disturbance of appetite, tearfulness, an inability to concentrate
and a retreat from social interaction. With terminal illness, despair, hopelessness and depression find expression in an unwillingness to fight
the illness.
Anger
Complementing the despair process, there is an anger process associated with the sense of having been abandoned. Aggression, conflict, and
drug and alcohol misuse are some of the common ways that grief-related anger finds expression. With terminal illness, the anger may be
projected onto family members or members of the medical team. Destructive conflicts within these relationships may occur, such as refusal
to adhere to medical regimes, to take medication or to participate in physiotherapy. Someone with a terminal illness may feel angry about
the physical or emotional suffering they are enduring or expect to endure as the illness progresses. They may also feel angry about the time,
opportunities and experiences they expected to have but will not now have. Anger may be directed towards a God or at fate for allowing this
to happen, at family members, friends or medical personnel who cannot share, remove or fully understand their illness, or at the self for
things done or not done in the past.
Anxiety
The expression of anger may be followed by remorse or fear of retribution. Where a person has been lost through illness or accident, those
grieving may worry that they too will die from similar causes. This can lead to a belief that one is seriously ill and to a variety of somatic
complains, such as stomach aches and headaches. It may also lead to a refusal to leave home lest a fatal accident occur.


Guilt and bargaining
The guilt process is marked by self-blame for causing or not preventing the death of the deceased. Some individuals hold the belief that
if they died this might magically bring back the deceased. Thus, the guilt process may underpin suicidal ideation or self-injury, which
invariably leads to referral for mental health assessment. With terminal illness, the illness may be experienced as a punishment for having
done something wrong. This sense of guilt underpins the bargaining process in which people facing death engage. The bargaining process
may be carried out as imagined conversations with a deity, where the dying person makes promises to live a better life if they are permitted
to live longer.
Acceptance
The final grief process is acceptance. With bereavement, the survivors reconstruct their view of the world so that the deceased person is
construed as no longer living in this world, but a benign and accessible representation of them is constructed which is consistent with their
belief system. For example, a Christian may imagine that the deceased is in heaven. Atheists may experience the deceased as living on in
their memory or in projects or photographs left behind. In terminal illness, acceptance involves a modification of the world view so that the
future is foreshortened and therefore the time remaining is highly valued and is spent living life to the full rather than searching in vain for
a miracle cure. For bereaved people new lifestyle routines are evolved as part of the process of accepting the death of a family member and
families become reorganized to take account of the absence of the deceased person. With terminal illness, once the inevitability of imminent
death has been accepted, routines that enhance the quality of life of the dying person may evolve.
Positive reactions to loss
Reviews of empirical studies of bereavement confirm that there is considerable variation in grief processes and that for some people in

certain circumstances bereavement and grieving lead to personal growth (Shackleton, 1983; Stroebe, 1993; Stroebe et al., 2008, 2013; Walsh
& McGoldrick, 2004; Wortman & Silver, 1989, 2001). Depression following bereavement is not universal. Only about a third of people suffer
depression following bereavement. Failure to show emotional distress initially does not necessarily mean that later adjustment problems
are inevitable. Also, contrary to the popular myth that grief counselling is the panacea for loss, not everyone needs to work through their
sense of loss by immediate intensive conversation about it. Different people use different strategies to cope with loss. Some use distraction or
avoidance, while others use confrontation of the grief experience and working through. Those that effectively use the former coping strategy
may not show emotional distress. The quality of family relationships and friendships may improve in response to bereavement or terminal
illness, with supportive relationships being strengthened.

Negative reactions to loss
Results of empirical studies confirm that for some people bereavement is a particularly destructive experience that does not lead to personal
growth and development (Shackleton, 1983; Stroebe, 1993; Stroebe et al., 2008, 2013; Walsh & McGoldrick, 2004; Wortman & Silver, 1989,
2001). A return to normal functioning following bereavement does not always occur rapidly. While the majority of people approximate
normal functioning within two years, a substantial minority of bereaved people continue to show adjustment difficulties even seven years
after bereavement. Extreme distress following bereavement commonly occurs in those who show protracted grief reactions. Resolution and
acceptance of death does not always occur. For example, parents who lose children or those who lose a loved one in an untimely fatal accident
show protracted patterns of grief. Grief may have a marked effect on physical functioning. Infections and other illnesses are more common
among bereaved people, and this is probably due to the effect of loss-related stress on the functioning of the immune system. However, with
the passage of time immune system functioning returns to normal. Just as bereavement may strengthen supportive family relationships,
it may also weaken already discordant relationships and lead to family breakdown. While children's grief reactions tend to be briefer that
those of adults, loss of a parent leaves young children vulnerable to depression in adult life. Adults bereaved as children have double the risk


of developing depression when faced with a loss experience in adult life compared with their non-bereaved counterparts. Bereaved children
most at risk for depression in adulthood are girls who were young when their parents died a violent or sudden death and who subsequently
received inadequate care associated with the surviving parent experiencing a prolonged grief reaction.
Loss and restoration dual process theory of grief
Stroebe and colleagues have proposed that bereavement entails loss-oriented and restoration-oriented processes (Hansson & Stroebe, 2007;
Stroebe & Schut, 2001). Bereaved people oscillate between coping with the emotional impact of loss (loss-oriented coping) and coping with
the practical issues of developing new routines, roles and relationships (restoration-oriented coping). When people suffer significant losses,
loss-oriented coping involves processing loss-related emotions and coming to accept the reality of these losses, while concurrently avoiding
engaging in restoration-oriented coping. During loss-oriented coping people may experience complex painful emotions such as shock,
sadness, anger, anxiety and guilt. In contrast, restoration-oriented coping involves establishing new lifestyles which take account of the loss
while concurrently avoiding engaging in loss-oriented coping. Denial, suppression of memories of the deceased and distraction may initially
be used to achieve this. People must engage in an adequate amount of both processes to allow them to grieve their losses and restore their
lives. They must also take respite from dealing with either type of stress to avoid becoming overwhelmed.
Having considered a family lifecycle model which assumes lifelong monogamy, lifecycle models that address other types of family
arrangements deserve attention, particularly those which evolve when separation, divorce and remarriage occur.
Lifecycle stages associated with separation and divorce
Divorce is no longer an aberration in the normal family lifecycle but a normative transition for a substantial minority of families (Ahrons,
2011; Amato, 2010; Fine & Harvey, 2006; Greene et al., 2012; Haskey, 1995). From Table 1.6 it may be seen that family transformation
through separation, divorce and remarriage may be conceptualized as a process involving a series of stages (McGoldrick et al., 2011). This

model outlines tasks that must be completed during various stages of the transformation process. Failure to complete tasks at one stage may
lead to problems at later stages. The stress associated with family transformation through divorce may contribute to the development of
psychological disorders and lead to a referral for psychological treatment.
Decision to divorce
In the first stage the decision to divorce occurs and accepting one's own part in marital failure is the central task. However, many contextual
factors contribute to divorce including age, socio-economic and employment status, educational level, parental marital status, premarital
cohabitation, prior marital status, prior parental status, ethnic similarity, marital harmony or conflict, and fidelity (Amato, 2010). Couples
are less likely to separate or divorce if they marry after the age of 20, are of high socio-economic status, have a high educational level, are
employed, have grown up in a family where their parents did not separate, have not cohabitated prior to marriage, have not previously
been married or had children, are from similar ethnic backgrounds, and have no history of marital conflict or infidelity. In contrast, divorce
is more common among those from lower socio-economic groups with limited education who are unemployed, whose parents separated
while they were growing up and who married before the age of 20. Divorce is also more common where partners have children, have been
married previously, are from different ethnic groups, and have a history of marital conflict, domestic violence and infidelity. The economic
resources associated with high socio-economic status, education and employment; the psychological resources associated with maturity;
the relationship resources associated with marital harmony and fidelity; the model of marital stability offered by non-divorced parents; and
the stresses associated with prior marriages and children and ethnic dissimilarity are probable explanations for links between these factors
and divorce. The relationship between these various factors and divorce, while consistent, are moderate to weak. That is, there are significant
subgroups of people who show some or all of these risk factors but do not divorce.

Separation
In the second stage of the lifecycle model of divorce, plans for separation are made. A cooperative plan for custody of the children, visitation,
finances and dealing with the responses of the families of origin to the plan to separate must be made if positive adjustment is to occur.
Mediation may facilitate this process (Folberg et al., 2004). The third stage of the model is separation and divorce. Mourning the loss of the
intact family; adjusting to the change in parent-child and parent-parent relationships; preventing marital arguments from interfering with
interparental cooperation; staying connected to the extended family; and managing doubts about separation are the principal tasks at this
stage.
Divorce leads to multiple life changes which affect parental well-being and the impact of these changes on parental well-being is mediated
by a range of personal and contextual factors (Amato, 2010). Divorce leads custodial parents to experience major changes in the their
lives including a change in residential arrangements, economic disadvantage, loneliness associated with social network changes and role
strain associated with the task overload that results from having to care for children and work outside the home. Non-custodial parents
experience all of these changes with the exception of role strain. Changes in divorced couples' residential arrangements, economic status,
social networks and role demands lead to a deterioration in physical and mental health for the majority of individuals immediately following
separation. Mood swings, depression, identity problems, vulnerability to common infections and exacerbation of previous health problems
are all common sequelae for adults who have separated or divorced. However, for most people these health problems abate within two years
of the separation. Better post-divorce adjustment occurs in couples who had very distressed marriages (presumably because separation leads
to relief) and in partners who initiate divorce.
Table 1.6 Extra stages in the family lifecycle entailed by separation or divorce and remarriage

Divorce
Decision to divorce
Accepting that the couple's
problems are not resolvable
Accepting one's own part in marital
failure
Planning separation
Supporting viable living
arrangements for all family
members following separation
Cooperatively developing a plan for
custody of the children, visitation and
finances Dealing with the extended
family's response to planned separation
Separation and divorce
Committing to continued
cooperative co-parenting and
joint financial support of children
Beginning to break attachment to
partners
Mourning the loss of the intact family
Managing doubts about separation
and becoming committed to divorce
Adjusting to the change in parent-
child and parent-parent relationships
Staying connected to partners' extended
families
Post-divorce family Establishing single-parent
custodial and non-custodial
households
Engaging in cooperative co-
parenting and joint financial
support of both households
Maintaining flexible arrangements
about custody, access and finances
without detouring conflict through
the children Ensuring both parents
retain strong relationships with the
children Managing changed financial
circumstances Re-establishing peer
relationships and a social network
Remarriage
Entering a new relationship
Recovering from emotional
Developing commitment to a new

Planning a new marriage and
family
Establishing a new family
divorce and loss of first marriage
Accepting concerns about
forming new family Being patient
about time required to adjust to
the complexity of the new family
arrangements
Breaking attachment to previous
partners Giving up the ideal of
an 'intact family' and accepting a
different family model
marriage
Planning to deal with children's loyalty
conflicts involving natural and step-
parents Planning arrangements for
continued cooperative financial and co-
parental relationships with ex-partners
within the context of new family
relationships
Realigning family relationships to
allow space for new members Sharing
memories and histories to allow
for integration of all new members
Continuing cooperative financial
and co-parental relationships with
ex-partners within context of new
relationship
Note: Adapted from McGoldrick et al. (2011).
Post-divorce period
The fourth stage of the lifecycle model of divorce in Table 1.6 is establishing single-parent custodial and non-custodial households during
the post-divorce period. Here couples must maintain flexible arrangements about custody, access and finances without detouring conflict
through the children, retain strong relationships with the children and re-establish peer relationships. The stresses and strains of residential

changes, economic hardship, role changes and consequent physical and psychological difficulties associated with the immediate aftermath
of separation may lead to mental health problems and compromise parents' capacity to cooperate with each other in meeting their children's
needs for safety, care and control (Amato, 2000, 2010; Fine & Harvey, 2006). Three distinct co-parenting styles have been identified in
studies of divorced families (Hetherington & Kelly, 2002). When conflictual parenting occurs, all parental messages are passed through the
child, and this go-between role forced upon the child is highly stressful and may lead to sustained adjustment problems. With cooperative
parenting a unified and integrated set of rules and routines about managing the children in both the custodial and non-custodial households
is developed. This is the optimal arrangement but only occurs in about one in five cases. With parallel parenting each parent has his or her
own set of rules for the children and no attempt is made to integrate these. This is the most common pattern. Most parents and children
show emotional and behavioural problems during the two-year period following parental separation (Amato, 2000, 2010). Between a
quarter and a fifth of children from families where divorce has occurred develop significant long-term psychological problems, a rate similar
to the prevalence of psychopathology in the general population (Hetherington & Kelly, 2002; Kessler & Wang, 2008).
New relationships
Establishing a new relationship occurs in the fifth stage of the divorce lifecycle model in Table 1.6. For this to occur, emotional divorce
from the previous relationship must be completed and a commitment to a new marriage must be developed. The sixth stage of the model
is planning a new marriage. This entails planning to deal with children's loyalty conflicts involving natural and step-parents, and planning
for continuing cooperative financial and co-parental relationships with ex-spouses. It is also important to adjust to the widening of the
extended family. In the final stage of the model, establishing a new family is the central theme. Realigning relationships within the family to
allow space for new members and sharing memories and histories to allow for integration of all new members are the principal tasks of this
stage.

Step-families have unique characteristics which are, in part, affected by the conditions under which they are formed (Pryor, 2008;
Sweeney, 2010). On the positive side, parents in second marriages are more open in communication, more willing to deal with conflict, more
pragmatic, less romantic and more egalitarian with respect to childcare and housekeeping tasks. On the negative side, compared with intact
first marriages, step-families are less cohesive and more stressful. Step-parent-child relationships on average tend to be more conflictual
than parent-child relationships from intact families. This is particularly true of step-father-daughter relationships and may be due to the
daughter's perception of the step-father encroaching on a close mother-daughter relationship. Divorced adults with children in middle
childhood and early adolescence who wish to remarry should try to wait until after the children have reached about 16-18 years if they want
their new relationship to have a fair chance of survival, because during the early teenage years (ages 10-15) children's resistance to parental
remarriage is at a maximum (Hetherington & Kelly, 2002).
Lifecycle stages associated with singlehood
In Western industrialized countries an increasingly large significant minority of adults are single (Berliner et al., 2011; DePaulo, 2006;
Klinenberg, 2012; Schwartzberg et al., 1995). In industrialized countries 20-40% of adults are living alone in single-person households.
Single adults constitute a heterogeneous population which includes people who are single and never married, single and cohabiting but not
married, separated and single, or widowed and single.
A proportion of people who are single are not single by choice. Personal and environmental constraints prevent them from forming or
maintaining intimate relationships. Personal constraints include mental health difficulties and psychological problems such as low self-
esteem, social anxiety and poor social skills. Environmental constraints include poverty or low socio-economic status, social isolation,
limited opportunities for meeting potential partners, and prejudice against people from certain ethnic minorities or against people with
certain physical or intellectual disabilities.


However, about half of all people who are single are single by choice and never married. They may have decided that the constraints of
married life outweigh the benefits, or they may wish to marry but have been unable to find a suitable partner and so choose to remain single
rather than marry an unsuitable partner. These single people adopt a variety of lifestyles from religious celibacy to living separately from
heterosexual or homosexual partners in committed long-term relationships, and many variations in between. The growth of this significant
minority within society challenges the traditional conservative view that remaining unmarried reflects a failure to achieve a normal
milestone in psychological development.
A model of the lifecycle of single adult life has been proposed to describe the trajectory of single people living in secular Western
industrialized settings (Berliner et al., 2011; Schwartzberg et al., 1995). In this model the first stage - establishing adulthood - occurs in
the twenties where the main tasks are achieving financial and emotional independence from the family of origin, and creating a place
in the world outside the family of origin, in work, friendships and romantic relationships. During this stage the single lifestyle may be
embraced, with considerable emphasis placed on forming strong peer relationships, and romantic attachments viewed as secondary to these
friendships. In the second stage - the single crisis - which occurs in the thirties, there a growing realization and acceptance that marriage
is either not desired or a suitable partner is not available. To adapt to this, the primary task of this stage is to expand life goals to embrace
possibilities other than marriage and having a traditional family including children. In the third stage - developing alternative scripts -
which occurs from the forties through midlife, the task is to let go of the 'ideal family' fantasy of marriage and children. Concurrently the
challenge in this phase is to develop an alternative authentic single lifestyle. This may involve investing in and valuing other relationships
including transient or long-term romantic (non-marital) relationships, friendships, work relationships and relationships with siblings
and parents. There may be considerable gender differences in the way the stage is managed by males and females, since the option of
marriage and having children remains a possibility for men longer than for women. In the fourth stage - the later years - the main task
is consolidating decisions made in various life domains including work, leisure and friendships, and enjoying the autonomy of singlehood.
Other tasks include planning for the future decline in physical abilities and facing illness and death of loved ones.


Gay and lesbian lifecycles
A significant minority of individuals have gay or lesbian sexual orientations. When such individuals engage in therapy, it is important that
frameworks unique to their sexual identity be used to conceptualize their problems, rather than frameworks developed for heterosexual
people (Laird, 2003).
Gay and lesbian identity formation
Lifecycle models of the development of gay and lesbian identities highlight two significant transitional processes: self-definition and
'coming out' (Green, 2012; Laird, 2003; Laird & Green, 1996; Patterson & D'Augelli, 2013). The first process - self-definition as a gay or lesbian
person - occurs initially in response to experiences of being different or estranged from same-sex heterosexual peers and later in response
to attraction to and/or intimacy with peers of the same gender. The adolescent typically faces a dilemma of whether to accept or deny the
homoerotic feelings he or she experiences. The way in which this dilemma is resolved is in part influenced by the perceived risks and benefits
of denial and acceptance. Where adolescents feel that homophobic attitudes within their families, peer groups and society will have severe
negative consequences for them, they may be reluctant to accept their gay or lesbian identity. Attempts to deny homoerotic experiences and
adopt a heterosexual identity may lead to a wide variety of psychological difficulties including depression, substance abuse, running away
and suicide attempts, all of which may become a focus for therapy. In contrast, where the family and society are supportive and tolerant of
diverse sexual orientations, and where there is an easily accessible supportive gay or lesbian community, then the benefits of accepting a gay
or lesbian identity may outweigh the risks, and the adolescent may begin to form a gay or lesbian self-definition. Once the process of self-
definition as gay or lesbian occurs, the possibility of 'coming out' to others is opened up. This process of coming out involves coming out to

other lesbian and gay people, to heterosexual peers, and to members of the family. The more supportive the responses of members of these three systems, the better the adjustment of the individual.
In response to the process of ‘coming out’ families undergo a process of destabilization. They progress from subliminal awareness of the young person’s sexual orientation, to absorbing the impact of this realization and adjusting to it. Resolution and integration of the reality of the youngster’s sexual identity into the family belief system depends upon the flexibility of the family system, the degree of family cohesion and the capacity of core themes within the family belief system to be reconciled with the youngsters sexual identity. Therapy conducted within this frame of reference aims to facilitate the processes of owning homoerotic experiences, establishing a gay or lesbian identity and mobilizing support within the family, heterosexual peer group, and gay or lesbian peer group for the individual.

Lifecycle stages
While there is huge variability in the patterns of lives of gay and lesbian couples, a variety of models of normative lifecycles have been proposed (Laird, 2003). Slater (1995) has offered a five-stage lifecycle model for lesbian couples. In the first stage of couple formation, the couple is mobilized by the excitement of forming a relationship but may be wary of exposing vulnerabilities. The management of similarities and differences in personal style so as to permit a stable relationship occurs in the second stage. In the third stage the central theme is the development of commitment, which brings the benefits of increased trust and security and the risks of closing down other relationship options. Generativity through working on joint projects or parenting is the main focus of the fourth stage. In the fifth and final stage the couple learn to jointly cope with the constraints and opportunities of later life including retirement, illness and bereavement on the one hand and grandparenting and acknowledging life achievements on the other.
McWhirter and Mattison (1984) developed a six-stage model of for describing the themes central to the development of enduring relationships between gay men. The first four stages, which parallel those in Slater’s model, are blending, nesting, maintaining and building. McWhirter and Mattison argue that the fifth stage in the gay couple lifecycle, which they term releasing, is characterized by each individual

within the couple pursuing his own agenda and taking the relationship for granted. This gives way to a final stage of renewal, in which the
relationship is once again privileged over individual pursuits.
Difficulties in managing progression through the lifecycle stages described here may lead gay and lesbian couples to seek therapy.
Personality development across the lifespan
While the aforementioned family lifecycle models offer a framework for considering interpersonal challenges across the lifespan, Newman
and Newman's (2015) modification of Erik Erikson's (1959, 1968) model of identity development presented in Table 1.7 offers a useful
framework for considering the major intrapsychic issues which individuals face at various points in the lifecycle. Within the model, the
lifespan is divided into a series of stages, each of which involves facing a challenge or crisis that requires resolution. If resolution occurs,
a particular personal strength or virtue evolves, and if not, a personal difficulty or vulnerability is engendered. The ease with which
successive dilemmas are managed is determined partly by the success with which preceding dilemmas were resolved. Individuals who fail to
satisfactorily resolve many dilemmas are particularly vulnerable to psychological problems, which may become a focus for treatment. What
follows is a summary of the main hypotheses entailed by this theory.
Trust versus mistrust
The main psychosocial dilemma to be resolved during the first 18 months of life is trust versus mistrust. If parents respond to infants' needs
in a predictable and sensitive way, the infant develops a sense of trust. In the long term, this underpins a capacity to have hope in the face
of adversity and to trust, as adults, that difficult challenges can be resolved. If the child does not experience the parent as a secure base from
which to explore the world, the child learns to mistrust others and this underpins a view of the world as threatening. This may lead the child
to adopt a detached position during later years, and difficulties with making and maintaining peer relationships may occur.


Table 1.7 Newman's revision of Erikson's psychosocial stage model
Stage
Infancy
0-2
Toddlerhood
2-4
Early school age
4-6
Middle childhood
6-12
Early adolescence
12-18
Later adolescence
18-24
Dilemma and main process Virtue and positive self-description
Trust vs. mistrust
Mutuality with caregiver
Autonomy vs. shame and
doubt
Imitation
Initiative vs. guilt
Identification
Industry vs. inferiority
Education
Group identity vs.
alienation
Peer pressure
Identity vs. identity
confusion
Hope
I can attain my wishes
Will
I can control events
Purpose/curiosity
I can plan and achieve goals
Competence
I can use skills to achieve goals
Affiliation
I can be loyal to the group
Fidelity to values
I can be true to my values
Pathology and negative self-
description
Withdrawal
I will not trust others
Compulsion
I will repeat this act to undo
the mess that I have made and I
doubt that I can control events
and I am ashamed of this
Inhibition
I can't plan or achieve goals so I
don't act
Inertia
I have no skills so I won't try
Isolation
I cannot be accepted into a group
Confusion
I have uncertainty about my

Role experimentation
Early adulthood
Intimacy vs. isolation
24-34
Mutuality with peers
Middle adulthood Generativity vs.
34-60
stagnation
Person-environment fit and place
creativity
Later adulthood
Integrity vs. despair
60-75
Introspection
Elderhood
Immortality vs.
75-Death
extinction
Social support
Love
I can be intimate with another
Care
I am committed to making the world a better
Wisdom
I am committed to life and have a deep flexible
understanding of it, but I know I will die soon
Confidence
I know that my life has meaning
Note: Adapted from Newman & Newman (2015) and Erikson (1959, 1968).
values and role
Exclusivity
I have no time for others so I will
shut them out
Rejectivity
I do not care about the future of
others, only my own future
Disdain
I am disgusted at my frailty and
my failures and express this as
disdain for others
Diffidence
I can find no meaning in my life
so I doubt that I can act
Autonomy versus shame and doubt
The main psychosocial dilemma in the preschool years (18 months to 3 years) is autonomy versus shame and doubt. During this period
children become aware of their separateness and strive to establish a sense of personal agency and impose their will on the world. Of course,
sometimes this is possible, but other times their parents will prohibit them from doing certain things. There is a gradual moving from the
battles of the terrible twos to the ritual orderliness that many children show as they approach school-going age. If parents patiently provide

the framework for children to master tasks and routines, autonomy develops. As adults such children are patient with themselves and have
confidence in their abilities to master the challenges of life. If parents are unable to be patient with the child's evolving wilfulness and
need for mastery and criticize or humiliate failed attempts at mastery, the child will develop a sense of self-doubt and shame. The lack of
patience and parental criticism will become internalized and children will evolve into adults who criticize themselves excessively and who
lack confidence in their abilities. In some instances this may lead to the compulsive need to repeat their efforts at problem solving so that
they can undo the mess they have made and so cope with the shame of not succeeding.
Initiative versus guilt
In the preschool years (3-6 years) the main psychosocial dilemma is initiative versus guilt. When children have developed a sense of
autonomy in the preschool years, they turn their attention outwards to the physical and social world and use their initiative to investigate
and explore its regularities with a view to establishing a cognitive map of it. The child finds out what is allowed and what is not allowed
at home and at school. Many questions about how the world works are asked. Children conduct various experiments and investigations,
for example by lighting matches, taking toys apart, or playing doctors and nurses. The initiative versus guilt dilemma is resolved when the
child learns how to channel the need for investigation into socially appropriate courses of action. This occurs when parents empathize with
the child's curiosity but establish the limits of experimentation clearly and with warmth. Children who resolve the dilemma of initiative
versus guilt act with a sense of purpose and vision as adults. Where parents have difficulty empathizing with the child's need for curiosity
and curtail experimentation unduly, children may develop a reluctance to explore untried options as adults because such curiosity arouses
a sense of guilt.
Industry versus inferiority
In middle childhood (6-12 years) the main psychosocial dilemma is industry versus inferiority. Having established a sense of trust,

autonomy and initiative, the child's need to develop skills and engage in meaningful work emerges. The motivation for industry may stem
from the fact that learning new skills is intrinsically rewarding and many tasks and jobs open to the child may be rewarded. Children who
have the aptitude to master skills that are rewarded by parents, teachers and peers emerge from this stage of development with new skills
and a sense of competence and self-efficacy about these. Youngsters who fail and are ridiculed or humiliated develop a sense of inferiority
and in adulthood lack the motivation to achieve.
Group identity versus alienation
The young adolescent faces a dilemma of group identity versus alienation. There is a requirement to find a peer group with which to become
affiliated so that the need for belonging will be met. Joining such a group, however, must not lead to sacrificing one's individuality and
personal goals and aspirations. If young adolescents are not accepted by a peer group they will experience alienation. In the longer term they
may find themselves unaffiliated and have difficulty developing social support networks which are particularly important for health and
well-being. To achieve group identity, their parents and school need to avoid over-restriction of opportunities for making and maintaining
peer relationship. This has to be balanced against the dangers or overpermissiveness since lack of supervision is associated with conduct
problems and drug dependence.
Identity versus identity confusion
While the concern of early adolescence is group membership and affiliation, the establishment of a clear sense of identity - that is, a sense
of who I am - is the major concern in late adolescence. Marcia (2007) has found that adolescents may achieve one of four identity states.
With identity diffusion there is no firm commitment to personal, social, political or vocational beliefs or plans. Such individuals are either
fun-seekers or people with adjustment difficulties and low self-esteem. With foreclosure, vocational, political or religious decisions are made
for the adolescent by parents or elders in the community and are accepted without a prolonged decision-making process. These adolescents


tend to adhere to authoritarian values. In cases where a moratorium is reached, the adolescent experiments with a number of roles before
settling on an identity. Some of these roles may be negative (delinquent) or non-conventional (dropout/commune dweller). However they are
staging posts in a prolonged decision-making process on the way to a stable identity. Where adolescents achieve a clear identity following
a successful moratorium, they develop a strong commitment to vocational, social, political and religious values and usually have good
psychosocial adjustment in adulthood. They have high self-esteem, realistic goals, a stronger sense of independence and are more resilient
in the face of stress. Where a sense of identity is achieved following a moratorium in which many roles have been explored, the adolescent
avoids the problems of being aimless, as in the case of identity diffusion, or trapped which may occur with foreclosure.
Intimacy versus isolation
The major psychosocial dilemma for people who have left adolescence is whether to develop an intimate relationship with another or
move to an isolated position. People who do not achieve intimacy experience isolation. Difficulties with establishing intimate relationships
typically emerge from experiences of mistrust, shame, doubt, guilt, inferiority and role confusion associated with failure to resolve earlier
developmental dilemmas in a positive manner.
Productivity versus stagnation
The midlife dilemma is that of productivity versus stagnation. People who select and shape a home and work environment that fits with
their needs and talents are more likely to resolve this dilemma by becoming productive. Productivity may involve procreation, work-
based productivity or artistic creativity. Those who become productive focus their energy into making the world a better place for future
generations. Those who fail to select and shape their environment to meet their needs and talents may become overwhelmed with stress and
become burned out, depressed or cynical on the one hand or greedy and narcissistic on the other.


Integrity versus despair
In later adulthood the dilemma faced is integrity versus despair. A sense of personal integrity is achieved by those who accept the events
that make up their lives – the good and the bad - and integrate these into a meaningful personal narrative in a way that allows them to face
death without fear. Those who avoid this introspective process or who engage in it and find that they cannot accept the events of their lives
or integrate them into a meaningful personal narrative that allows them to face death without fear develop a sense of despair. This despair
entails a sense of self-rejection for one's past failures and current frailties. The process of integrating failures, disappointments, conflicts,
growing incompetencies and frailty into a coherent life story is very challenging. The positive resolution of this dilemma in favour of
integrity rather than despair leads to wisdom.
Immortality versus extinction
In the final months of life the dilemma faced by the very old is immortality versus extinction. A sense of immortality can be achieved by
living on through one's children; through a belief in an afterlife; by the permanence of one's achievements (either material monuments or
the way one has influenced others); by viewing the self as being part of the chain of nature (the decomposed body becomes part of the earth
that brings forth new life); or by achieving a sense of experiential transcendence (a mystical sense of continual presence). When a sense of
immortality is achieved the acceptance of death and the enjoyment of life, despite frailty, becomes possible. This is greatly facilitated when
people have good social support networks to help them deal with frailty, growing incompetence and the possibility of isolation. Those who
lack social support and have failed to integrate their lives into a meaningful story may fear extinction and find no way to accept their physical
mortality while at the same time evolving a sense of immortality.

Newman and Newman's (2015) adaptation of Erikson's model has received support from many studies and offers a useful framework
within which to conceptualize individual psycho-social development across the lifespan. However, it appears that the stages do not always
occur in the stated order, and often later life events can lead to changes in the way in which psychosocial dilemmas are resolved.

Diversity
The lifecycle models and related research findings presented in this chapter have all been informed by a predominantly Western, white,
middle-class, Judeo-Christian sociocultural tradition. However, in Westernized countries, we now live in multicultural, multi-class context.
An increasingly significant proportion of clinical psychologists' patients are from ethnic minority groups. Also, many are not from the
affluent middle classes, but survive in poverty and live within a subculture that does not conform to the norms and values of the white,
middle-class community. When such individuals engage in therapy, a sensitivity to these issues of race and class is essential (Falicov, 2003,
2012; Hardy & Laszloffy, 2002; Ingoldsby & Smith, 2005; McGoldrick & Hardy, 2008; Patel et al., 2000).
This type of sensitivity involves an acceptance that different patterns of organization, belief systems and ways of being in the broader
sociocultural context may legitimately typify individuals and families from different cultures. People from different ethnic groups and
subcultures may have differing norms and styles governing communication, problem solving, rules, roles and routines. They may have
different belief systems involving different ideas about how progression through the lifecycle should occur, how relationships should be
managed, how marriages should work, how parent-child relationships should be conducted, how the extended family should be connected
and how relationships between families and therapists should be conducted. For example, traditional theories of human development
prioritized separation from parents as a key task of adolescence and early adult life over the capacity to develop mature adult relationships.
This reflected the well-documented Western bias of valuing individuation and independence in adult development (Loevinger, 1976). Thus,
clinicians usually looked at events such as moving out of the parental home to set up an independent home unit as signifiers of moving

towards adult maturity. More recently, theories of human development sought to redress this relative neglect of life goals of connectedness
and relationship with the introduction of the concept of interdependence and theories about how abilities to relate develop over the
lifespan (Josselson, 1992). Being able to be mature and maintain relationships with the family of origin and community may be a better
model of mature functioning, particularly for clients from non-Western cultures; for example, an adult client's decision to live with parents
until marriage, as is expected in a culture, could reflect psychological health and may not represent pathology. Most importantly, clinical
psychologists must be sensitive to the relatively economically privileged position that most occupy with respect to patients from ethnic
minorities and lower socio-economic groups. We must also be sensitive to the fact that we share a responsibility for the oppression of
minority groups. Without this type of sensitivity we run the risk of illegitimately imposing one set of norms and values on clients and
furthering this oppression.
The recovery model
The recovery model and models of lifespan development, set out earlier, share a view of psychological problems, as a temporary deviations
from normal lifespan development and as occurring within a social context. The recovery movement is being adopted as an overarching
framework for mental health services internationally (Roe & Davidson, 2008; Slade, 2009). The recovery model and movement have
evolved in reaction to a traditional view of mental health difficulties originally championed by Kraepelin (1899). Kraepelin's (1899)
conceptualization of psychological problems, particularly psychosis as neurological disorders with a chronic declining course, led to the
development of long-term institutional care and a reliance on physical treatments, including medication, as the main interventions for
schizophrenia during much of the 20th century. This in turn led to the institutionalization of 'psychiatric patients' and the gradual erosion
of their civil rights within institutions. It also led to their stigmatization and marginalization within society. A further consequence of
Kraepelin's position was a reduced emphasis on the role of trauma and stress in the aetiology of psychological disorders and the value of

psychosocial interventions in their treatment. It was in response to this position that the recovery model emerged at the end of the 20th
century and the dawn of the new millennium.
The recovery movement initially arose from service user groups and mental health professionals involved in rehabilitation, but later
came to be adopted internationally as a best practice framework for service delivery. The model conceptualizes the recovery process as a
personal journey and privileges the concepts of optimism, well-being, personal strengths, supportive relationships, collaboration, personal
choice, adaptive coping, developing a meaningful life, civil rights, empowerment and inclusion. The recovery model has been inspired by
longitudinal research which showed that chronic decline in psychosis was not inevitable (Häfner & van der Heiden, 2008), that trauma
and stress play a role in the aetiology of psychosis (Bebbington & Kuipers, 2008), and that psychosocial interventions have an important
place in facilitating recovery from psychosis (Mojtabai et al., 1998). The recovery movement embraced these research findings, placing a
strong emphasis on professionals working collaboratively with service users to help them achieve their preferred goals. There was a shift
in emphasis from institutional to community care and from remediating patient-deficits to fostering service user strengths. There was also
an emphasis on the civil rights of patients to make choices about their preferred treatment and to have an inclusive place in society. The
recovery movement has created a context for the creation of innovative community-based approaches to mental health service delivery,
such as the strengths-based case management model and assertive community treatment.
Summary
Psychological problems occur within the context of the lifecycle. The family lifecycle may be conceptualized as a series of stages, each
characterized by a set of tasks that must be completed to progress to the next stage. Failure to complete tasks may lead to adjustment
problems. The stages are: leaving home, couple formation, families with young children, families with adolescents, launching children and
moving into midlife, families with parents in late middle age, and families with parents nearing the end of life.

Family transformation through separation, divorce and remarriage may also be viewed as a staged process. The stages are: decision to divorce, planning separation, separation and divorce, establishing single-parent households, entering a new relationship, planning a new marriage, and establishing new family.
Lifecycle models of the development of gay and lesbian identities highlight two significant transitional processes: the process of self-definition as a gay or lesbian person and the process of coming out to other lesbian and gay people, heterosexual peers and members of the family. The more supportive the responses of other lesbian and gay people, heterosexual peers and members of the family, the better adjustment will be. Stage models for the development of lesbian and gay couple relationships have been developed which take account of their unique life circumstances.
The development of individual identity within a family context may also be conceptualized as a series of stages. At each stage the individual must face a personal dilemma. The ease with which successive dilemmas are managed is determined partly by the success with which preceding dilemmas were resolved and partly by the quality of relationships within the individual's family and social context. The dilemmas are: trust versus mistrust; autonomy versus shame and doubt; initiative versus guilt; industry versus inferiority; group identity versus alienation; identity versus identity confusion; intimacy versus isolation; productivity versus stagnation; integrity versus despair; and immortality versus extinction.
When working with individuals from ethnic minorities and lower socio-economic groups, a sensitivity to issues of race and class is essential if the illegitimate imposition of norms and values from the dominant culture is to be avoided.
A recovery model of psychological problems is being adopted as an overarching framework for mental health services internationally. This model, like lifespan development, models views psychological difficulties as temporary deviations from normal development and as occurring within a social context. Recovery is viewed as a personal journey, and the recovery model privileges the concepts of optimism, well-being, personal strengths, supportive relationships, collaboration, personal choice, adaptive coping, developing a meaningful life, civil rights, empowerment and inclusion.

Exercise
Work in pairs adopting roles of interviewer and interviewee and reverse roles when the interview is over. The interviewer should invite
the interviewee to describe (1) how his or her family managed the task as the various stages of the lifecycle; (2) how he or she personally
managed Erikson's psychosocial dilemmas; and (3) what strengths these developmental experiences have given him or her.
Further reading for practitioners
McGoldrick, M., Carter, B., & Garcia-Preto, N. (2011). The Expanded Family Lifecycle. Individual, Family and Social Perspectives (Fourth
Edition). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Further reading for clients
Sheehy, G. (2006). Passages: Predictable Crises of Adult Life (30th Anniversary Edition). New York: Ballantine.
References
Adams, B. (1986). The Family: A Sociological Interpretation (Fourth Edition). San Diego: Harcourt Brace & Jovanovich.
Ahrons, C. (2011). Divorce: An unscheduled family transition. In M. McGoldrick, B. Carter, & N. Garcia-Preto (Eds.), The Expanded Family
Lifecycle. Individual, Family and Social Perspectives (Fourth Edition, pp. 292-306). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Alhabib, S., Nur, U., & Jones, R. (2010). Domestic violence against women: Systematic review of prevalence studies. Journal of Family
Violence, 25, 369-382.
Amato, P. (2000). The consequences of divorce for adults and children. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 1269-1287.
Amato, P. (2010). Research on divorce: Continuing trends and new developments. Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 650-666.
Bebbington, P., & Kuipers, E. (2008). Psychosocial factors. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 74-81).
New York: Guilford Press.
Berliner, K., Jacob, D., & Schwartzberg, N. (2011). Single adults and the lifecycle. In M. McGoldrick, B. Carter, & N. Garcia-Preto (Eds.), The
Expanded Family Lifecycle. Individual, Family and Social Perspectives (Fourth Edition, pp. 163-175). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Bianchi, S. M., & Milkie, M. A. (2010). Work and family research in the first decade of the 21st century. Journal of Marriage and Family, 72,
705-725.
Bowlby, J. (1988). A Secure Base: Clinical Implications of Attachment Theory. London: Routledge.
Brown, G. (2009). Medical sociology and issues of aetiology. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, & J. Geddes (Eds.), New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry (Volume 1, pp. 268-275). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cameron, D. (2010). Sex/gender, language and the new biologism. Applied Linguistics, 31, 173-192.
Carr, A. (2011). Positive Psychology. The Science of Happiness and Human Strengths (Second Edition). London: Brunner-Routledge.
Carr, A. (2012). Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice (Third Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
Casey, J., Garrett, J., Brackett, M., & Rivers, S. (2010). Emotional intelligence, relationship quality and partner selection. In G. Geher & G.
Miller (Eds.), Mating Intelligence (pp. 263-282). New York: Psychology Press.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. (2008). Handbook of Attachment (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.
Conger, R. D., Conger, K. J., & Martin, M. J. (2010). Socioeconomic status, family processes, and individual development. Journal of
Marriage and Family, 72, 685-704.


Connidis, I. A. (2010). Family Ties and Aging (Second Edition). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cooper, J., & Vetere, A. (2005). Domestic Violence and Family Safety: A Systemic Approach to Working with Violence in Families. London:
Routledge.
Costello, E., Copeland, W., & Angold, A. (2011). Trends in psychopathology across the adolescent years: What changes when children
become adolescents, and when adolescents become adults? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 52, 1015-1025.
Darling, N., & Steinberg, L. (1993). Parenting styles as context: An integrative model. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 487-496.
DePaulo, B. (2006). Singled Out: How Singles Are Stereotyped, Stigmatized, and Ignored, and Still Live Happily Ever After. New York: St
Martin's Press.
Erikson, E. (1959). Identity and the Life Cycle. New York: International University Press.
Erikson, E. (1968). Identity, Youth and Crisis. New York: Norton.
Falicov, C. (2003). Culture in family therapy: New variations on a fundamental theme. In T. Sexton, G. Weeks, & M. Robbins (Eds.),
Handbook of Family Therapy (pp. 37-58). New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Falicov, C. (2012). Immigrant family processes. A multidimensional framework. In F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal Family Processes (Fourth
Edition, pp. 297-323). New York: Guilford.
Fincham, F., & Beach, S. (2010). Marriage in the new millennium: A decade in review. Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 630-649.
Fincham, F. Stanley, S., & Beach, S. (2007). Transformative processes in marriage: An analysis of emerging trends. Journal of Marriage and
Family. Special issue: A Minisymposium on Transformative Process in Marriage, 69, 275-292.
Fine, M., & Harvey, J. (2006). Handbook of Divorce and Relationship Dissolution. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Fitzpatrick, M. (1988). Between Husbands and Wives: Communication in Marriage. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Folberg, J., Milne, A., & Salem, P. (2004). Divorce and Family Mediation: Models, Techniques, and Applications. New York: Guilford.
Frude, N. (1990). Understanding Family Problems. Chichester: Wiley.


Goldstein, S., & Brooks, R. (2013). Handbook of Resilience in Children. New York: Springer.
Gottman, J. (1993). The roles of conflict engagement, escalation and avoidance in marital interaction: A longitudinal view of five types
of couples. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 6-15.
Gottman, J. M., & Notarius, C. I. (2002). Marital research in the 20th century and a research agenda for the 21st century. Family Process,
41, 159-197.
Gould, R. (1981). Transformations: Growth and Change in Adult Life. New York: Simon Schuster.
Green, R. (2012). Gay and lesbian family life: Risk, resilience and rising expectations. In F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal Family Processes (Fourth
Edition, pp. 172-195). New York: Guilford.
Greene, S., Anderson, E., Forgatch, M., DeGarmo, D., & Hetherington, E. (2012). Risk and resilience after divorce. In F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal
Family Processes (Fourth Edition, pp. 102-127). New York: Guilford.
Gurman, A. (2008). Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy (Fourth Edition). New York: Guilford.
Häfner, H., & van der Heiden, W. (2008). Course and outcome. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 100-
116). New York: Guilford Press.
Hansson, R., & Stroebe, M. (2007). The dual process model of coping with bereavement and development of an integrative risk factor
framework. In R. Hansson & M. Stroebe (Eds.), Bereavement in Late Life: Coping, Adaptation, and Developmental Influences (pp. 41-60).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hardy, K., & Laszloffy, T. (2002). Couple therapy using a multicultural perspective. In A. Gurman & N. Jacobson (Eds.), Clinical Handbook
of Couples Therapy (Third Edition, pp. 569-596). New York: Guilford.
Haskey, J. (1995). Trends in marriage and cohabitation: The decline in marriage and the changing pattern of living in partnerships.
Population Trends, 80, 5-15.
Hetherington, E., & Kelly, J. (2002). For Better or for Worse: Divorce Reconsidered. New York: Norton.


Holtzworth-Munroe, A., Meehan, J., Rehman, U., & Marshall, A. (2002). Intimate partner violence. An introduction for couple therapists.
In A. Gurman & N. Jacobson (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy (Third Edition, pp. 441-465). New York: Guilford.
Ingoldsby, B., & Smith, S. (2005). Families in Global and Multicultural Perspective (Second Edition). New York: Sage.
Jones, P. (2013). Adult mental health disorders and their age of onset. British Journal of Psychiatry Supplement, 54, s5-s10.
Josselson, R. L. (1992). The Space Between Us: Exploring the Dimensions of Human Relationships. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kessler, R., & Wang, P. (2008). The descriptive epidemiology of commonly occurring mental disorders in the United States. Annual
Review of Public Health, 29, 115-129.
Klinenberg, E. (2012). Going Solo: The Extraordinary Rise and Surprising Appeal of Living Alone. New York: Penguin Press.
Komro, K., Flay, B., & Biglan, A. (2011). Creating nurturing environments: A science-based framework for promoting child health and
development within high-poverty neighborhoods. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 14, 111-134.
Kraepelin, E. (1899). Psychiatrie (Sixth Edition). Leipzig: Barth.
Laird, J. (2003). Lesbian and gay families. In F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal Family Processes (Third Edition, pp. 176-209). New York: Guilford.
Laird, J., & Green, R. (1996). Lesbians and Gays in Couples and Families: A Handbook for Therapists. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Lamb, M. (2012). Mothers, fathers, families, and circumstances: Factors affecting children's adjustment. Applied Developmental Science,
16, 98-111.
Loevinger, J. (1976). Ego Development: Conceptions and Theories. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Marcia, J. (2007). Theory and measure: The Identity Status Interview. In M. Watzlawik & A. Born. (Eds.), Capturing Identity: Quantitative
and Qualitative Methods (pp. 186-124). Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Masten, A. (2013). Risk and resilience in development. In P. Zelazo (Ed.), Oxford Handbook of Developmental Psychology. Volume 2. Self and
Other (pp. 579-607). New York: Oxford University Press.


McAdams, D., & Cox, K. (2010). Self and identity across the lifespan. In M. Lamb & A. Freund (Eds.), The Handbook of Lifespan Development. Volume 2. Social and Emotional Development (pp. 158–207). New York: Wiley.
McGoldrick, M., Carter, B., & Garcia-Preto, N. (2011). The Expanded Family Lifecycle. Individual, Family and Social Perspectives (Fourth Edition). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
McGoldrick, M., & Hardy, K. (2008). Re-visioning Family Therapy. Race Culture and Gender in Clinical Practice (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.
McGorry, P. (2015). Arguments for transformational reform of mental health care for young people. Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine, 32, 9–11.
McWhirter, D., & Mattison, D. (1984). The Male Couple; How Relationships Develop. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Mojtabai, R., Nicholson, R., & Carpenter, B. (1998). Role of psychosocial treatments in management of schizophrenia: A meta-analysis review of controlled outcome studies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24, 569–587.
Neugarten, B., & Weinstein, R. (1964). The changing American grandparent. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 26, 199–204.
Newman, B., & Newman, P. (2015). Development Through Life: A Psychosocial Approach (Twelfth edition). Stamford, CT: Cengage.
O'Leary, D. (2008). Couple therapy and physical aggression. In A. Gurman (Ed.), Clinical Handbook of Couples Therapy (Fourth Edition, pp. 478–498). New York: Guilford.
Ozer, D., & Benet-Martinez, V. (2006). Personality and the prediction of consequential outcomes. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 401–421.
Patel, N., Bennett, E., Dennis, M., Dosanjh, N., Mahtani, A., Miller, A., & Nadirshaw, Z. (2000). Clinical Psychology Race and Culture. A Training Manual. Leicester: British Psychological Society.
Patterson, C., & D'Augelli, A. (2013). Handbook of Psychology and Sexual Orientation. New York: Oxford University Press.

Pryor, J. (2008). The International Handbook of Stepfamilies: Policy and Practice in Legal, Research, and Clinical Environments. New York:
Wiley.
Roe, D., & Davidson, L. (2008). Recovery. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 566-574). New York:
Guilford Press.
Rutter, M. (2013). Annual research review: Resilience—Clinical implications. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 474-487.
Rutter, M., & Maughan, B. (2002). School effectiveness findings 1979-2002. Journal of School Psychology, 40, 451-475.
Schwartzberg, N., Berliner, K., & Jacob, D. (1995). Single in a Married World. New York: Norton.
Shackleton, C. (1983). The psychology of grief: A review. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 6, 153-205.
Slade, M. (2009). Personal Recovery and Mental Illness: A Guide for Mental Health Professionals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Slater, S. (1995). The Lesbian Lifecycle. London: Free Press.
Stein, A., Ramchandani, P., & Murray, L. (2008). Impact of parental psychiatric disorder and physical illness. In M. Rutter, D. Bishop, D.
Pine, S. Scott, J. Stevenson, E. Taylor & A. Thapar (Eds.), Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (Fifth Edition, pp. 407-420). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Stith, S., McCollum, E., Rosen, K., Locke, L., & Goldberg, P. (2005). Domestic violence focused couples treatment. In J. Lebow (Ed.),
Handbook of Clinical Family Therapy (pp. 406-430). New York: Wiley.
Stroebe, M. (1993). Coping with bereavement: A review of the grief work hypothesis. Omega Journal of Death and Dying, 26, 19-42.
Stroebe, M., Hansson, R., Schut, H., & Stroebe. W. (2008). Handbook of Bereavement Research and Practice: Advances in Theory and
Intervention. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Stroebe, M., & Schut, H. (2001). Models of coping with bereavement: A review. In M. Stroebe, R. Hansson, W. Stroebe & H. Schut (Eds.),
Handbook of Bereavement Research: Consequences, Coping, and Care (pp. 375-403). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.


Stroebe, M., Schut, H., & Van Den Bout, J. (2013). Complicated Grief. Scientific Foundations for Healthcare Professionals. Abingdon:
Routledge.
Sweeney, M. (2010). Remarriage and stepfamilies: Strategic sites for family scholarship in the 21st century. Journal of Marriage and
Family, 72, 667-684.
Thiele, D. M., & Whelan, T. A. (2006). The nature and dimensions of the grandparent role. Marriage and Family Review, 40, 93-108.
Ungar, M., Ghazinour, M., & Richter, J. (2013). Annual research review: What is resilience within the social ecology of human
development? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 348-366.
Walsh, F., & McGoldrick, M. (2004). Living Beyond Loss. Death in the Family (Second Edition). New York: Norton.
Wortman, C., & Silver, R. (1989). The myths of coping with loss. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 349-357.
Wortman, C. B., & Silver, R. C. (2001). The myths of coping with loss revisited. In M. S. Stroebe, R. O. Hansson, W. Stroebe & H.
Schut (Eds.), Handbook of Bereavement Research: Consequences, Coping, and Care (pp. 405-429). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Zolkoski, S., & Bullock, L. M. (2012). Resilience in children and youth: A review. Children and Youth Services Review, 34, 2295-2303.


Chapter 2 Classification and epidemiology
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-2
This chapter will offer an overview of the way psychological problems are classified in current editions of the World Health Organization's
International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10, 1992) and the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-5, 2013), along with a summary of the epidemiology of major categories of problems. Strengths and weaknesses
of categorical approaches to conceptualizing psychological problems will be considered. Dimensional models, case formulation and
alternatives to DSM and ICD will be considered.
Functions of classification
In clinical psychology, classification has three main functions. First, it facilitates the growth of a body of expert knowledge which
includes information about clinical features of psychological difficulties, risk and protective factors associated with their aetiology and
maintenance, and effective treatment and prevention programmes. This body of knowledge informs evidence-based clinical practice.
Second, classification systems facilitate the development of epidemiological information about the incidence, prevalence and course of

psychological problems. This sort of information is used to plan services and decide how to prioritize the allocation of sparse resources.
Third, classification systems provide a language through which clinicians, researchers and members of other professions, including law,
communicate with each other.
ICD-10 and DSM-5
Currently ICD-10 and DSM-5 are the two most widely used systems for classifying psychological problems. DSM-5 is the fifth edition of the
American Psychiatric Association's (2013) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. ICD-10 is the tenth edition of the World
Health Organization's (1992) International Classification of Diseases. Psychological problems are classified in chapter V of the ICD-10 (WHO,
1992, 1993, 1996, 1997). Four current versions of the ICD-10 are available: the Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines (WHO, 1992);
the Diagnostic Criteria for Research (WHO, 1993); the Diagnostic and Management guidelines for Mental Disorders in Primary Care: ICD-10
Chapter V Primary Care Version (WHO, 1996); and the Multiaxial Presentation of the ICD-10 for Use in Adult Psychiatry (WHO, 1997a). The
Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines version gives prototype descriptions of each disorder and general principles to follow in
making a diagnosis. The Diagnostic Criteria for Research version gives explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria for making diagnoses of cases
for inclusion in research studies. The Primary Care version gives guidance on differential diagnosis on the basis of primary complaints,
making a definitive diagnosis and treatment planning. The Multiaxial version offers a way to concurrently code information about diagnosis,
disability and contextual factors. In clinical practice, DSM-5 is often viewed as the US alternative to the European ICD-10. However, ICD-10
is not exclusively European. It is the instrument through which the World Health Organization, a United Nations Agency, collects data and
compiles statistics on all diseases in UN countries. While the DSM system is only available in English, the ICD has been translated into many
widely spoken languages.


The DSM and ICD classification systems have been revised on many occasions. These revisions have been influenced by advances in
scientific knowledge and also by other factors such as vested interests of those involved in their revision. The American Psychiatric
Association, which represents psychiatrists in the US, published the first edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual in 1952 (APA,
1952), and six subsequent revised versions over the next six decades: DSM-II, DSM-III, DSM-III-R, DSM-IV, DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 (APA,
1968, 1980, 1987, 1994, 2000, 2013). The first two versions of the DSM were influenced by the psychoanalytic tradition. Diagnoses were
based on inferred psychodynamic processes rather than observable behaviour. One consequence of this was that many diagnostic categories
lacked inter-rater reliability. Also, the system had limited coverage. Many cases presented with problems that fell outside the classification
system. These shortcomings were addressed in 1980 in DSM-III. The coverage problem was partly solved by greatly increasing the number
of diagnostic categories. The reliability of these categories was improved through the inclusion of explicit diagnostic criteria. While DSM-III
was designed to be atheoretical, the biomedical tradition was a predominant influence on this and all subsequent versions of the DSM, which
have led to vast increases in the number of individuals using psychotropic medications (Frances, 2013). The third and fourth editions of
the DSM also included multiaxial systems to permit coding of additional information on medical and psychosocial functioning. Personality
disorders were coded on axis II, medical conditions on axis III, psychosocial problems on axis IV and global functioning on axis V. However
the multiaxial system was dropped in DSM-5.
ICD is published by the World Health Organization in 43 languages and used worldwide for morbidity and mortality statistics,
reimbursement systems and health care planning. Early versions of ICD, which date back to the late 1800s, were used to classify causes of
death but not illnesses. It was not until 1949 with the publication of ICD-6 (WHO, 1949) that diseases, including 'mental diseases', were
listed in ICD. Chapter V of ICD-10 which lists psychological problems was published in 1992 (WHO, 1992).
The main psychiatric disorders described in ICD-10 are listed in Table 2.1 and those described in DSM-5 are listed in Table 2.2. From
Tables 2.1 and 2.2 it is clear that in DSM-5 and ICD-10 the number of conditions listed and the organization of these into groups are not the
same. ICD-11 is due for publication in 2016, and the intention is for chapter V of ICD-11 to have a similar structure to DSM-5, so that both

systems include the same list of disorders grouped in the same way. However, there is controversy about this because of limited evidence
for the validity current diagnostic categories (First, 2009; Uher & Rutter, 2012). The discrepancy between the number and organization of
categories in ICD and DSM systems and their limited validity indicate that these classification systems are not 'carving nature at its joints',
the criterion for a successful theory first proposed in Plato's Phaedrus (Campbell et al., 2011).
Advantages of ICD-10 and DSM-5
Both ICD-10 and DSM-5 have a number of strengths. They contain fairly comprehensive groups of categories covering most psychological
difficulties seen in clinical practice. These classification systems can be traced back to the seminal work of Emil Kraepelin (1899), the
grandfather of modern psychiatry. In both systems, for any case, the main diagnosis is given in categorical rather than dimensional terms.
There has been an emphasis, within both systems, on hierarchical organization of main diagnostic categories, with a few broadband
categories subsuming many narrowband categories. For most categories, diagnoses are based on clusters of observable symptoms and
explicit diagnostic criteria. This strategy is adopted to avoid the unreliability of diagnoses based on inferred intrapsychic variables that
characterized earlier versions of both systems. However, in some instances organic or psychosocial aetiological factors are used to define
disorders. For example, substance-related disorders are defined by the substances used and exposure to a major stressor is one of the criteria
for post-traumatic stress disorder. In both systems a person may receive more than one major diagnosis and this provides a way of dealing
with the problem of comorbidity. Both the DSM and ICD systems are open to revision in the light of new information and are regularly
revised.
Table 2.1 Main ICD-10 disorders
Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders
Dementia in Alzheimer's disease

Vascular dementia
Dementia in other diseases classified elsewhere (Pick's, Creutzfeldt-Jakob, etc.)
Organic amnesic syndrome, not induced by alcohol and other substances
Delirium, not induced by alcohol and other psychoactive substances
Other mental disorders due to brain damage and dysfunction and to physical disease
Personality and behavioural disorder due to brain disease, damage and dysfunction
Mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive substance use
Harmful use
Dependence syndrome
Acute intoxication
Withdrawal state
Amnesic syndrome
Psychotic disorder
Residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders
Schizophrenia
Schizotypal disorder
Persistent delusional disordersAcute and transient psychotic disorders
Induced delusional disorders
Schizoaffective disorders

Mood disorders
Bipolar affective disorder
Recurrent depressive disorder
CyclothymiaDysthymia
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
Agoraphobia
Social phobias
Specific phobias
Panic disorder
Generalized anxiety disorderObsessive-compulsive disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder
Acute stress reaction
Adjustment disorders
Dissociative or conversion disorders
Somatoform disorders (somatization, hypochondriacal and persistent somatoform pain disorder)
Neurasthenia
Depersonalization-derealization syndrome
Behavioural syndromes associated with physiological disturbances and physical factors
Eating disorders
Anorexia nervosaBulimia nervosaOvereating associated with other psychological disturbances

Nonorganic sleep disorders
Nonorganic insomniaNonorganic hypersomniaNonorganic disorder of the sleep-wake schedule
SleepwalkingSleep terrorsNightmares
Sexual dysfunction, not caused by organic disorder or disease
Lack or loss of sexual desire
Sexual aversion and lack of sexual enjoyment
Sexual aversion
Lack of sexual enjoyment
Failure of genital response
Orgasmic dysfunction
Premature ejaculation
Nonorganic vaginismus
Nonorganic dyspareunia
Excessive sexual drive
Mental and behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium, not elsewhere classified
Disorders of adult personality and behaviour
Specific personality disorders
Paranoid personality disorder
Schizoid personality disorder
Dissocial personality disorder
Emotionally unstable personality disorder

Histrionic personality disorder
Anankastic personality disorder
Anxious (avoidant) personality disorder
Dependent personality disorder
Enduring personality changes, not attributable to brain damage and disease
Enduring personality change after catastrophic experience or psychiatric illness
Habit and impulse disorders
Pathological gambling
Pathological fire-setting (pyromania])
Pathological stealing (kleptomania)
Trichotillomania
Gender identity disorders
Transsexualism
Dual-role transvestism
Gender identity disorder of childhood
Disorders of sexual preference
Fetishism
Fetishistic transvestism
Exhibitionism
Voyeurism
Paedophilia

Sadomasochism
Psychological and behavioural disorders associated with sexual development and orientation
Sexual maturation disorder
Egodystonic sexual orientation
Sexual relationship disorder
Mental retardation
Disorders of psychological development
Specific developmental disorders of speech and language
Specific speech articulation disorder
Expressive language disorder
Receptive language disorder
Acquired aphasia with epilepsy (Landau-Kleffner syndrome)
Specific developmental disorders of scholastic skills
Specific reading disorderSpecific spelling disorderSpecific disorder of arithmetical skills
Mixed disorder of scholastic skillsSpecific developmental disorder of motor function
Pervasive developmental disorders
Childhood autismAtypical autismRett's syndromeAsperger's syndrome
Behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in childhood and adolescence
Hyperkinetic disorders
Disturbance of activity and attention
Hyperkinetic conduct disorder

Conduct disorders
Conduct disorder confined to the family context
Unsocialized conduct disorder
Socialized conduct disorder
Oppositional defiant disorder
Mixed disorders of conduct and emotions
Depressive conduct disorder
Emotional disorders with onset specific to childhood
Separation anxiety disorder of childhood
Phobic anxiety disorder of childhood
Social anxiety disorder of childhood
Sibling rivalry disorder
Disorders of social functioning with onset specific to childhood and adolescence
Elective mutism
Reactive attachment disorder of childhood
Disinhibited attachment disorder of childhood
Tic disorders
Transient tic disorderChronic motor or vocal tic disorderCombined vocal and multiple motor tic disorder (de la Tourette's syndrome)
Other behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in childhood and adolescence
Nonorganic enuresis
Nonorganic encopresis


Feeding disorder of infancy and childhood
Pica of infancy and childhood
Stereotyped movement disorders
Stuttering (stammering)
Cluttering
Table 2.2 Main DSM-5 disorders
Neurodevelopmental disorders
Intellectual disability
Communication disorders
Autism spectrum disorder
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Specific learning disorder
Motor disorders
Tic disorders
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders
Schizotypal personality disorder
Delusional disorder
Brief psychotic disorder
Schizophreniform disorder
Schizophrenia

Schizoaffective disorder
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition
Catatonia
Bipolar and related disorders
Bipolar I disorder
Bipolar II disorder
Cyclothymic disorder
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition
Depressive disorders
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
Major depressive disorder, single and recurrent episodes
Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia)
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
Substance/medication-induced depressive disorder
Depressive disorder due to another medical condition
Anxiety disorders
Separation anxiety disorder
Selective mutism
Specific phobia

Social anxiety disorder (social phobia)
Panic disorder
Panic attack
Agoraphobia
Generalized anxiety disorder
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Body dysmorphic disorder
Hoarding disorder
Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder)
Excoriation (skin-picking) disorder
Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition
Trauma- and stressor-related disorders
Reactive attachment disorder
Disinhibited social engagement disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Acute stress disorder
Adjustment disorders

Dissociative disorders
Dissociative identity disorder
Dissociative amnesia
Depersonalization/derealization disorder
Somatic symptom and related disorders
Somatic symptom disorder
Illness anxiety disorder
Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder)
Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions
Factitious disorder
Feeding and eating disorders
Pica
Rumination disorder
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder
Anorexia nervosa
Bulimia nervosa
Binge-eating disorder
Elimination disorders
Enuresis
Encopresis
Sleep-wake disorders

Insomnia disorder
Hypersomnolence disorder
Narcolepsy
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
Central sleep apnea
Sleep-related hypoventilation
Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders
Sleepwalking
Sleep terrors
Nightmare disorder
Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder
Restless legs syndrome
Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder
Sexual dysfunctions
Delayed ejaculation
Erectile disorder
Female orgasmic disorder
Female sexual interest/arousal disorder
Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder
Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder
Premature (early) ejaculation

Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction
Gender dysphoria
Disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders
Oppositional defiant disorder
Intermittent explosive disorder
Conduct disorder
Antisocial personality disorder
Pyromania
Kleptomania
Substance-related and addictive disorders
Substance use disorder
Substance induced disorders (intoxication and withdrawal)
Specific use and induced disorders for alcohol, caffeine, cannabis, hallucinogens, inhalants, opioids, sedatives, stimulants, tobacco
Gambling disorder
Neurocognitive disorders
Delirium
Major neurocognitive disorder
Mild neurocognitive disorder
Personality disorders
Cluster A personality disorders
Paranoid personality disorder

Schizoid personality disorder
Schizotypal personality disorder
Cluster B personality disorders
Antisocial personality disorder
Borderline personality disorder
Histrionic personality disorder
Narcissistic personality disorder
Cluster C personality disorders
Avoidant personality disorder
Dependent personality disorder
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
Paraphilic disorders
Voyeuristic disorder
Exhibitionistic disorder
Frotteuristic disorder
Sexual masochism disorder
Sexual sadism disorder
Pedophilic disorder
Fetishistic disorder
Transvestic disorder
Medication-induced movement disorders and other adverse effects of medication

Other conditions that may be a focus for clinical attention
Relational problems
Abuse and neglect
Educational or occupational problems
Housing and economic problems
Problems related to crime or interaction with the legal system
Other problems related to the social environment
Other related to other psychosocial, personal or environmental circumstances
Notwithstanding attempts to present DSM as atheoretical, both DSM and ICD are premised on a biomedical model of psychological
difficulties. Within this tradition, which can be traced back to Kraepelin's (1899) work, it is assumed that psychological problems are
symptoms of underlying organic 'mental illnesses'. It is also assumed that 'mental illnesses' are not on a continuum with normal
functioning. The aim of research conducted within the biomedical tradition is to identify the discrete causes of these conditions and the
specific treatments which address these underlying causes.
Because evidence for the validity of biomedically based psychiatric diagnoses is sparse (with the exception of neuropsychological
conditions, the dementias, and moderate to severe intellectual disability), and because the biomedical approach may lead to stigmatization
and personal disempowerment, it is unacceptable to some clinical psychologists (e.g. Bentall, 2009; Beutler & Malik, 2002; Johnstone, 2000;
Kinderman, 2014; Newnes et al., 1999; Rapley et al., 2011; Smail, 2005). However, it is important that clinical psychologists be familiar with
DSM and ICD systems and be able to use them in clinical practice because the administration and funding of clinical services and of some
research programmes is framed in terms of ICD and DSM systems. Also, these classification systems are broadly accepted by most mental
health professionals, many service users, the legal profession, the media and the general public.


Criticisms of psychiatric classification systems
DSM and ICD classification systems, the biomedical model which underpins these systems, and the process of psychiatric diagnosis and
treatment associated with this overall approach to helping people with psychological problems have been extensively criticized. Many
widely acknowledged limitations of DSM and ICD classification systems have been summarized by the British Psychological Society, Division
of Clinical Psychology (2011) in an important position paper written in anticipation of the publication of DSM-5. In this paper it was
proposed that that DSM and ICD are flawed at a scientific level and also have a negative impact on service users. In each of these domains a
series of detailed arguments was presented. The following are the main issues identified as scientific limitations of psychiatric diagnosis:
• Subjective interpretation is presented as objective fact;
• Lack of reliability;
• Lack of validity;
• Lack clinical utility;
• Overemphasis on biological factors;
• Lack of emphasis on contextual factors;
• Lack of sensitivity to cultural and other types of diversity.
The following are the main issues identified as ways in which a psychiatric diagnosis negatively impacts on clients:
• Leads to discrimination and social exclusion;
• Leads to stigmatization which has a negative impact on identity;

• Marginalizes knowledge from lived experience;
• Rejection of diagnoses elicits negative responses from mental health professionals;
• Disempowers service users;
• Leads to over-reliance on medication.
Each of these issues will be addressed in detail.
Subjective interpretation is presented as objective fact
DSM and ICD diagnoses are frequently presented as objective statements of fact. Diagnoses are given in a manner which conveys that the
service user has a 'real illness' such as major depressive disorder or schizophrenia which requires treatment, and not that these diagnoses
are subjective opinions or interpretations. A more accurate position would be that the diagnosing clinician has made a subjective judgement
that the person's behaviour and account of their experiences meets the diagnostic criteria for a hypothetical condition. Two further
problems are exposed by this more accurate position. The clinician's judgement may be biased by a wide range of factors to such an extent
that the client may be judged by another clinician not to meet the criteria for diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder. The more serious issue,
however, is that the diagnosed hypothetical condition may have limited validity (Uher & Rutter, 2012).
Lack of reliability
A major problem with early versions of ICD and DSM systems was their poor inter-rater reliability (Kirk & Kutchins, 1994). This lack of
reliability arose for three main reasons. First, diagnoses were based on inferred constructs rather than observable behaviour. Second, there
were no explicit criteria for making psychiatric diagnoses, so clinicians were probably using different implicit diagnostic criteria for a given
diagnostic category. Third, diagnoses were made on the basis of behaviour elicited by unstandardized interviews. This meant that two

clinicians who interviewed the same patient might arrive at different diagnoses because their different interview styles elicited different
samples of behaviour. The introduction of standardized diagnostic interviews such as the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM disorders
(SCID; First et al., 1997, 2015) or the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI; WHO, 1997b) addressed this third problem. As
mentioned earlier, DSM-III addressed the other two problems by defining symptoms in observable terms and introducing explicit diagnostic
criteria which stated the symptoms required for a diagnosis, the required duration and extent of these, and exclusion criteria. These two
features have been retained in later versions of DSM including DSM-5. Despite these innovations, many psychiatric diagnoses have only
moderate inter-rater reliability. Kappa reliability coefficients must be above .7 in order to be classified as satisfactory. However, the highest
reliabilities (Kappas of .7-.9) occur when diagnoses are made on the basis of a synthesis of information drawn from multiple sources
including diagnostic interviews, interviews with other informants and behavioural observations of nursing or research staff (Meyer, 2002).
Currently for both DSM-5 and ICD-10, establishing procedures for routinely obtaining satisfactory reliability for diagnoses remains a central
challenge.
Along with the use of diagnostic criteria, since the arrival of DSM-III there has been a gradual narrowing of definitions of disorders to
reduce within-category heterogeneity and improve reliability. This effort to improve within-category homogeneity has led to the problem
of poor coverage. That is, many cases typically referred for consultation cannot be classified into clearly defined categories. To deal with the
poor coverage problem, undefined diagnostic categories have been included in DSM and ICD to accommodate individuals who show some
but not all features of a diagnostic category, or constellations of symptoms which fall between two clearly defined clinical syndromes. These
undefined diagnostic categories are termed unspecified, for example, unspecified depressive disorder. (Unspecified disorders have not been
listed in Tables 2.1 and 2.2.) Establishing the reliability of unspecified diagnostic categories has proved challenging.
Lack of validity
The validation of diagnostic categories within DSM and ICD systems involves conducting research programmes which demonstrate that

cases which meet the diagnostic criteria for a particular category share common critical characteristics. These include predisposing risk
factors, precipitating factors that trigger the onset of the disorder, maintaining factors that lead to persistence or exacerbation of the
disorder and protective factors that modify the impact of aetiological factors. These factors may potentially fall within the biological,
psychological or social domains, although within the biomedical tradition the primary emphasis is on biological factors. The course of the
disorder over time and the response of cases to specific treatments should also be shared to a fairly marked degree by cases falling within the
same valid diagnostic category. Despite extensive research on many disorders, it is difficult to point to any one condition where validity on
all of these criteria has been established (Bentall, 2004; Boyle, 2002; Uher & Rutter, 2012). There is not a high level of specificity in the links
between aetiological factors and discrete psychological problems. Many of the same predisposing, precipitating and maintaining factors are
shared by different types of psychological problems. Furthermore, the course of any disorder and its response to treatment is highly variable
and is strongly influenced for most disorders by comorbidity and the number of risk factors present.
Lack of clinical utility
The limited reliability and validity of DSM and ICD classification systems constrain their usefulness for informing policy, commissioning
and developing services, creating treatment guidelines, conducting clinical practice, and carrying out research.
Very different interventions may be required by cases with the same DSM or ICD diagnosis, and very similar interventions may be required
by cases with different diagnoses. A depressed person who is experiencing chronic intimate partner violence and a dysphoric person who
has sustained a sports injury and experiencing work-related stress may require very different treatment programmes, despite the fact that
they both meet the criteria for major depressive disorder. The former may benefit from a systemic intervention targeting intimate partner
violence (Stith et al., 2005) and the latter from individual cognitive behaviour therapy (Beck et al., 1979). People who present with depressive
and anxiety disorders may both benefit from treatment with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; Taylor et al., 2014). These very
common examples highlight the limited utility of diagnostic categories for guiding clinical practice and service planning.

Overemphasis on biological factors
As has been noted earlier, DSM and ICD classification systems have both evolved within a biomedical tradition which dates back
to Emil Kraepelin (1899). Within this tradition psychological problems, abnormal and atypical experiences, and personal distress are
conceptualized as symptoms of underlying psychopathology which is primarily biologically based. Research informed by this position has
investigated the role of biological factors such as dysregulation of neurotransmitter systems, structural and functional brain abnormalities,
and genetic vulnerabilities in the aetiology of psychological difficulties. The biomedical tradition has also advocated the use of biological
intervention such as medication and electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) to treat psychological problems. Within this tradition psychological
interventions are viewed as an adjunct to biological treatments which target the underlying neurobiological basis for 'mental illness'. The
search for disorder-specific brain pathology has, so far, been unsuccessful (Uher & Rutter, 2012). While some medications are disorder-
specific (e.g. stimulants for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, or ADHD), others such as SSRIs have wide applicability across a range of
mood and anxiety disorders. Furthermore, without psychological interventions, biomedical interventions have limited long-term positive
effects (Carr, 2009). In short, there is limited evidence for the idea implicit in DSM and ICD classification systems that most psychological
problems are due to specific brain diseases which can be alleviated with specific medications. Unfortunately the dominance of the DSM and
ICD biomedical model within public health services minimizes the attention paid to psychosocial factors in the aetiology of psychological
problems and personal distress, and the need for psychological treatment programmes to be more widely available as first-line interventions
(Boyle, 2013; Cromby et al., 2013; Moncrieff, 2008; Rapley et al., 2011).
Lack of emphasis on contextual factors
Because DSM and ICD classification systems have both evolved within a biomedical tradition where psychological problems and personal
distress are viewed as symptoms of underlying biologically based 'mental illnesses', these systems may decontextualize psychological

problems. The process of psychiatric diagnosis (and in many instances the prescription for psychotropic medication) may obscure the links
between people's psychological problems and their social and historical contexts. For most psychological problems, historical and contextual
predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors may be identified. If clinical psychologists work in health care systems where
ICD and DSM diagnoses are used, then offering comprehensive formulations along with diagnoses may go some way towards preventing the
decontextualizing process associated with psychiatric diagnosis from occurring.
Because some in some cases psychological problems are reactions to stresses inherent in the structure of society such as poverty, injustice,
prejudice, racism, sexism, ageism and intolerance for nonconformity, there is a social activist role for clinical psychologists to play in
highlighting the role of these contextual factors in the aetiology and maintenance of psychological problems (Johnstone, 2000; Newnes
et al., 1999; Rapley et al., 2011; Szasz, 2010). Psychiatric diagnosis, with its implicit emphasis on biomedical factors in the aetiology of
psychological problems and its privileging of physical treatment, draws attention away from important psychosocial and political changes
that may be required to alleviate psychological distress and to preserve civil liberties.
Lack of sensitivity to cultural and other types of diversity
DSM and ICD classification systems have both evolved not just within a biomedical tradition, but within a patriarchal, Western world view.
By definition, the process of diagnosis using these classification systems involves ethnocentric bias, when clinicians are diagnosing people
from groups that differ from their own in terms of ethnicity, sexuality, gender, class, spirituality and culture. Psychiatric diagnosis can be
discriminatory to a diverse range of groups whose world views, values and lifestyles fall outside the norms of a mainstream patriarchal,
Western world view (e.g. Bayer, 1987; Busfield, 1996; Fernando, 2010). If clinical psychologists work in health care systems where ICD and
DSM diagnoses are used, then actively developing sensitivity to the world views, values and lifestyles of service users from other social and
cultural groups may go some way towards preventing the ethnocentric bias inherent in the ICD and DSM diagnostic systems from adversely
affecting clients (Patel et al., 2000).


Impact on clients
ICD and DSM diagnoses may have a positive or negative impact on clients. Some service users are relieved when they hear that they have
a diagnosis of depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) or intellectual disability because these diagnoses help them to understand
their condition, suggest ways that these conditions may be managed and may entitle them to state disability benefits. However, in other
cases service users are distressed by diagnostic labels like schizophrenia or personality disorder. They may prefer to view these conditions
as understandable reactions to challenging life events rather than as stigmatizing 'mental illnesses'. What follows are some of the ways in
which the Clinical Division of the British Psychological Society (2011) proposes that psychiatric diagnoses may have a negative impact on
clients.
Leads to discrimination and social exclusion
Receiving an ICD or DSM diagnosis can lead to discrimination and social exclusion due to prevailing negative social attitudes towards those
with a psychiatric diagnosis, particularly psychosis (Corrigan et al., 2011; Read et al., 2006).
Leads to stigmatization which has a negative impact on identity
The language of disorder, deficit and disability which is central to ICD and DSM classification systems may lead to stigmatization, a negative
self-image and low self-esteem. Clients may come to view themselves predominantly in terms of their psychiatric diagnoses, deficits and
disabilities, and fail to appreciate their strengths, resilience and personal resources (Barham & Hayward, 1995; Corrigan et al., 2011; Estroff,
1993; Honos-Webb & Leitner, 2001).


Marginalizes knowledge from lived experience
Clients typically make sense of their problems and the distress that these cause in terms of their personal lived experiences. These
experiences may include challenges and stresses which they have encountered (e.g. child abuse or bereavement), life transitions they are
going through (e.g. starting a new job or moving house), coping strategies that they have used (e.g. drug use or overeating), relationship
problems (e.g. bullying or domestic violence) and resource problems (e.g. poverty). These sorts of factors are not accorded a prominent place
in ICD and DSM diagnostic systems and are viewed as relatively minor trigger factors within the biomedical model that underpins the ICD
and DSM systems (Beresford, 2013). This marginalization of clients' understandings of their problems in terms of their lived experiences in
favour of biomedical explanations, without acknowledgement of the limitations of such explanations, may be distressing for clients.
Rejection of diagnoses elicits negative responses from diagnosticians
If ICD and DSM diagnoses are presented in an authoritarian way as objective facts rather than jointly arrived at in a collaborative way, with
acknowledgement, as appropriate, of the limitations of the diagnostic system and the biomedical model, then clients may be more likely
to disagree with their diagnoses. Where clients reject a diagnosis this can be interpreted by mental health service providers as reflecting
lack of insight, without acknowledging the limitations of the biomedical model or the interpersonal impact of an authoritarian approach to
diagnosis (Terkelsen, 2009). This process can be distressing for clients.
Disempowers service users
Mental health services in which ICD and DSM diagnoses inform biomedical treatment of psychological problems may create a context within
which service users are personally disempowered and in which they become dependent on mental health professionals for expert advice
and treatment (Johnstone, 2000). Such biomedically based treatment systems run the risk of discouraging clients from making personal

choices about their own recovery. Indeed, some recovery narratives include a rejection of diagnoses as a central part of the recovery process
(Bassman, 2007; Deegan, 1993; Longden, 2010; May, 2000).
Thomas Szasz (2010) argued that service users involuntarily detained under mental health legislation suffer greater disempowerment
than people imprisoned for criminal activity. Under mental health legislation, involuntary detention and treatment involves establishment
of a psychiatric diagnosis which places the individual at risk of self-harm or causing harm to others.
Leads to over-reliance on medication
Mental health services in which ICD and DSM diagnoses inform biomedical treatment of psychological problems create a context where
there is an over-reliance on medication, without acknowledgement of its limitations and side effects, and without appropriate resourcing of
psychological alternatives (Moncrieff, 2008; Rapley et al., 2011).
Addressing the potential negative impact of diagnosis
Where clinical psychologists work in mental health service where ICD and DSM diagnoses are used to inform treatment, it is vital that they
are mindful of the potential negative effects of diagnosis on clients, as outlined earlier, and that they take steps to reduce the negative impact
of diagnosis on client well-being. Developing an empathic, positive, respectful, collaborative therapeutic alliance is central to this process.
Disease mongering for financial gain
In the US, Allen Frances (2013), head of the DSM-IV Task Force, has criticized DSM-5 for 'disease mongering' for financial gain. That is, many
normal human experiences such as childhood tantrums, overeating, grief following loss, and forgetfulness in later life have been defined
in DSM-5 as psychiatric disorders. These disorders may then be diagnosed and treated with medication, yielding very significant profits for
the profession of psychiatry and pharmaceutical companies that produce psychotropic medications. Where clinical psychologists work in

mental health service where ICD and DSM diagnoses are used to inform treatment, they have a role in questioning the medicalization of
normal human experiences and in proposing the use of psychological interventions to alleviate distress.
Alternatives to ICD and DSM
The modest reliability, limited validity and questionable utility of ICD and DSM classification systems are due to the fact that most
psychological difficulties are not distributed within the population as disease-like categorical entities. Rather they occur as normally
distributed dimensional characteristics. It is therefore expedient for clinical psychologists in some instances to use dimensional systems in
their conceptualization of service users' difficulties.
The avowedly atheoretical approach adopted in the DSM classification system leads to diagnoses which neither explain the aetiology
of problems nor point to potential treatment options. The vast research literature on psychopathology shows that a range of biological,
psychological and social, predisposing, precipitating and maintaining factors contribute to the aetiology of psychological problems. It is
therefore expedient for clinical psychologists to make use of multifactorial formulation frameworks in assessing psychological problems
and planning treatment.
The World Psychiatric Association's International Guidelines for Diagnostic Assessment (IGDA; Mezzich et al., 2003) offers an assessment
and diagnostic framework that unifies the many systems used throughout the world. A central feature of IGDA is its recognition of the need
for cultural sensitivity in evaluating people with psychological difficulties.
The lack of attention given to psychodynamic factors in DSM and ICD classification systems led a task force of members from major US
and international psychoanalytic associations to produce the Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual (PDM; PDM Taskforce, 2006). This manual
is intended to complement ICD and DSM systems by providing a multidimensional approach to describing psychodynamic aspects of service
users' functioning and ways of engaging them in psychodynamic therapy.


The failure of diagnosis-based research to validate diagnostic categories led the US National Institute of Mental Health in 2013 to cease
funding research exclusively based on DSM categories and to develop a dimensional framework known as Research Domain Criteria (RDoC;
Cuthbert & Insel, 2013) to guide future research on developmental psychopathology.
In the following sections an outline will be given of these alternatives to ICD and DSM.
Dimensional approaches
Within DSM and ICD psychological disorders are conceptualized in categorical terms. That is, it is assumed that within a population some
people have psychological disorders and some do not, and that there are qualitative differences between those that do and do not meet
the diagnostic criteria for psychological disorders. Trait theories, in contrast, propose that a limited number of dimensions may be used to
characterize important aspects of behaviour and experience. Traits are normally distributed within the population. So for any given trait
(e.g. extraversion) most people show a moderate level of the trait, but a few people show extremely low or extremely high levels of the
trait. Within a population, people who fall at the extremities of these dimensions may have the sorts of difficulties attributed in DSM and
ICD to psychological disorders. According to trait theory, these people differ from others only in the degree to which they show particular
traits. For example, extreme introversion may lead to difficulties with making and maintaining social relationships and to a diagnosis of
social anxiety disorder or avoidant personality disorder. Extreme neuroticism may lead to difficulties with mood and self-regulation and to
the diagnosis of anxiety or mood disorders. Extreme conscientiousness may lead to obsessional ideas and compulsive behaviour and to a
diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder or obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Trait theory entails the view that individuals with
psychological problems who meet diagnostic criteria for DSM or ICD diagnoses are not qualitatively different from others and do not suffer
from qualitatively distinct 'mental illnesses'. Rather, their difficulties fall on a continuum with normal functioning.


In recent years psychological trait theory has come to be dominated by the Five-Factor Model of Personality (McCrae & Costa, 2008). This
model includes the following dimensions: neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, agreeableness and conscientiousness. The
weight of evidence shows that 50% of the variance in these personality traits (with the exception of agreeableness) may be accounted for
by genetic factors (Paris, 1996). The mechanisms by which genetic factors influence personality traits are complex. Multiple genes probably
determine temperamental characteristics, and these interact with environmental influences in the development of personality traits. There
is considerable evidence from longitudinal studies for the link between temperament and personality traits. Children with high activity
levels and positive affect become extraverted. Children who are highly irritable and fearful show high levels of neuroticism in later life.
Children who show attentional persistence later develop high levels of conscientiousness (Rothbart & Ahadi, 1994). Children with extreme
temperamental characteristics may be more vulnerable to environmental stressors or they may elicit reactions from parents and others that
exacerbate their extreme temperamental characteristics.
Trait theories of personality, particularly the Five-Factor Model of Personality, have been applied to the study of personality disorders with
some degree of success (Samuel & Widiger, 2008; Widiger & Mullins-Sweatt, 2010). In DSM-5 personality disorders fall into three clusters:
cluster A, eccentric personality disorders (schizoid, schizotypal, paranoid); cluster B, erratic-dramatic personality disorders (borderline,
antisocial, narcissistic, histrionic); and cluster C, anxious personality disorders (avoidant, dependent and obsessive-compulsive). Distinctive
personality trait profiles have been empirically identified for each personality disorder, and treatment strategies have been developed for
problems associated with extreme levels of each of the five major personality traits. For example, extreme introversion is a central trait for
most disorders in cluster A; extreme extraversion and low agreeableness or conscientiousness typify most disorders in cluster B; and high
neuroticism characterizes all cluster C personality disorders. Widiger argues that trait theory offers a more scientifically useful approach
to assessment. Personality questionnaires that have been developed to measure the big five personality traits have good psychometric
properties (De Raad & Perugini, 2002). They are reliable and valid, and have population norms. The five-factor personality trait theory
and related measures assume a demonstrated continuity between normal and abnormal personality. Research on the big five personality

traits has led to a significant body of knowledge on the genetic and childhood antecedents of normal adult personality, neurobiological
correlates of personality traits, and the stability and change in personality traits over the life course. This body of research may inform
our understanding of personality disorders, if we base our assessment of personality disorders on the five-factor model. Compared with
categorical classification systems, trait models offer a more parsimonious way of describing people with rigid dysfunctional behaviour
patterns. This in turn offers a more parsimonious way to conceptualize the development of effective treatments.
Dimensional approaches have not only been used to address individual differences in personality, but also to measure variation within
highly specific domains such as mood, anxiety and psychotic experiences (Westen et al., 2002). Multivariate studies of self-report and
symptom rating scales show that anxiety and depression both share a common negative affect factor, but that depression is uniquely
associated with exceptionally low positive affect scores, while anxiety is characterized by exceptionally high scores on an autonomic
arousal dimension. Research on the shared aetiology, symptomatology and treatment response of schizophrenia spectrum disorders and
factor analytic studies of their symptomatology suggests that the distribution of psychotic symptoms within the population more closely
approximates dimensions rather than disease-like categories. The three principal dimensions are those involving positive symptoms,
negative symptoms and disorganization (Rietkerk et al., 2008).
Dimensional approaches to diagnosing and conceptualizing psychological problems have the advantage of fitting better with the way
many psychological characteristics are normally distributed within the population. However, there is little doubt that some psychological
difficulties, such as bipolar disorder, are discretely distributed and so may be better accounted for within a categorical system (Edvardsen
et al., 2008). Severe and profound intellectual disability is also distributed within the population as a categorical disease-like entity, while
mild and moderate intellectual disability appear to be distributed as the tail of a normal distribution of cognitive ability conceptualized in
dimensional terms (Hodapp et al., 2011).
Dimensional conceptualizations of psychological problems offer a useful framework for assessment in many instances. The use of reliable
and valid self-report inventories and observer rating scales can readily be incorporated into routine clinical practice to provide assessments

of the status of people on such dimensions. Furthermore, cut-off scores can be used, when administratively necessary, to translate
dimensional scores into diagnoses. Finally, improvement or deterioration may be assessed in terms of changes in scores along dimensions.
Manuals for most inventories, rating scales and tests give rules for interpreting change scores which take into account the psychometric
properties of the instrument.
Complex formulations
It is both a strength and a weakness of the DSM and ICD classification systems that, for the most part, diagnostic categories are
defined in atheoretical terms. An atheoretical approach prevents the unreliability of diagnoses based on inferred biological, intrapsychic
or interpersonal variables, which characterized earlier versions of both systems. However, an atheoretical classification system leaves
clinicians without a way to conceptualize the complex array of biopsychosocial predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective
factors relevant to specific disorders and their treatment. What follows is an encapsulation of some of the more important factors that may
be considered in developing complex and relatively comprehensive formulations for psychological problems in adulthood.
Predisposing factors
Biological, psychological and social factors associated with early life may predispose people to developing psychological problems in
adulthood (Ingram & Price, 2010). Genetic vulnerabilities, the consequences of prenatal and perinatal complications, and the sequelae of
early insults, injuries and illnesses may predispose people to developing problems in later life. In addition to these biological predisposing
factors, a number of psychological characteristics, traits and relatively enduring belief systems may also predispose people to developing
psychological difficulties. Low intelligence, difficult temperament, extreme levels of major personality traits (introversion, neuroticism,
conscientiousness and disagreeableness), low self-esteem and an external locus of control are some of the more important variables


in this category. Important social predisposing factors for psychological problems include separation from or loss of a parent; parental
psychopathology and related impaired parenting; insecure attachment to parents in early life; family disorganization and sustained
exposure to marital discord; physical and sexual abuse; neglect; and the absence of an adequate social support network in childhood.

Precipitating factors
Some psychological problems, for example neurodevelopmental disorders, are present at birth. For others the onset is quite gradual. For
example, antisocial personality disorder may begin early in childhood as oppositional defiant disorder, developing later into conduct
disorder before evolving into a personality disorder at the end of adolescence. In other instances, the onset of psychological problems
is very sudden and in response to a clear stressor, as in the case of post-traumatic stress disorder, or a build-up of life stresses as in
some cases of depression. Despite these variations, it is conceptually useful to distinguish precipitating factors from predisposing and
maintaining factors, while recognizing that precipitating factors may not be identifiable in all instances. Psychological problems may be
precipitated by acute life stresses such as loss experiences, humiliation, illness, injury, victimization, redundancy, financial difficulties or
imprisonment (Brown, 2009). They may also be precipitated by lifecycle transitions such as leaving home, changing jobs, marriage or
making a commitment to a long-standing relationship, having children, family conflict, children leaving home, parental decline, separation
or divorce, or forming a new family (McGoldrick et al., 2011).

Maintaining factors
Once psychological problems have developed, they may be maintained by psychological, social and biological factors. Beliefs about
self-regulation and self-regulatory skills are important psychological maintaining factors. In particular, psychological problems may be
maintained by poor self-efficacy beliefs, dysfunctional attributions, cognitive distortions and dysfunctional coping strategies. Modifying
these maintaining factors is a central aim of cognitive-behaviour therapy described in Chapter 3. Other psychological maintaining factors


include problematic attachment styles and immature defence mechanisms. These factors are a central focus in psychodynamic therapy,
which will be considered in Chapter 4. Within the social domain psychological problems may be maintained by patterns of interaction
within the marriage, the family and the wider social network and by the way in which the individual engages with treatment agencies.
These include interaction patterns characterized by communication and joint problem-solving deficits; high stress and low support;
inadvertent reinforcement of problem behaviour; conflict and violence; emotional enmeshment or disengagement; and overly chaotic or
rigid organization of the social system. These maintaining factors are addressed by systemic approaches to therapy, which will be considered
in Chapter 6. Biological factors, notably the dysregulation of certain neurotransmitter systems, may maintain some psychological disorders.
Psychopharmacological treatments target these systems. In Chapter 7 these biomedical interventions will be addressed.
Protective factors
A variety of protective factors within the biological, psychological and social domains have been identified (Carr, 2009, 2011; Masten, 2013;
Rapp & Goscha, 2006; Rutter, 2013; Ungar et al., 2013). Within the biological domain a personal history of good health and a family history
indicative of little or no genetic vulnerability to psychological problems are protective factors. For people with a recurrent episodic disorder,
a positive response to pharmacological treatment in a previous episode may be considered a protective biological factor, since it suggests
that such a response may occur again. Within the psychological domain, a number of traits, relatively enduring belief systems and other
personal attributes are notable protective factors. These include good premorbid adjustment and a history of having coped well with a
similar problem in the past, psychological-mindedness, a capacity to understand psychological formulations of personal difficulties, and an
acceptance that these difficulties may be addressed by engaging in psychological treatment. Other protective psychological factors include
average or above-average intelligence; a history of having an easy temperament; moderate to high levels of major personality traits, notably
extraversion, emotional stability, conscientiousness and agreeableness; high self-esteem; an internal locus of control; strong self-efficacy
beliefs; an optimistic attributional style; functional coping strategies; a secure attachment style; and mature defence mechanisms. Within

the social domain a crucially important protective factor is the capacity to make and maintain a cooperative therapeutic alliance with
professionals within the relevant treatment agency. Other protective factors within the social domain include current and past membership
of a family and social system with good communication and joint problem solving coupled with low stress and high emotional support.
From this encapsulation of some of the more important factors to consider in developing comprehensive formulations for psychological
problems in adulthood, it is clear that multiple aetiological factors need to be considered including positive factors. Positive protective
factors are particularly important because highlighting these can motivate clients to engage in treatment, and building on these strengths
may also serve a focus for therapy.
International Guidelines for Diagnostic Assessment (IGDA)
The World Psychiatric Association's International Guidelines for Diagnostic Assessment (IGDA; Mezzich et al., 2003) offers an assessment
and diagnostic framework that unifies many systems used throughout the world. These include ICD, DSM, the Chinese Classification of
Mental Disorders (Chinese Medical Association, 1995), the Cuban Glossary of Psychiatry (Otero, 2000) and the Latin American Guide
for Psychiatric Diagnosis (Berganza et al., 2001). A central feature of IGDA is its emphasis on cultural sensitivity in evaluating people
with psychological difficulties. The guidelines also propose that diagnostic formulation be based on multiple data sources including
clinical interviews with service users; interviews with members of their social networks; past health and social care records; and special
investigations such as laboratory tests and psychometric assessments. The IGDA recommends the use of a multiaxial system with clinical
disorders on Axis I, disabilities on Axis II, contextual factors on Axis III and quality of life on Axis IV. The first three axes of this system
are the same as those used in the ICD-10 multiaxial system for adults (WHO, 1997b). The IGDA recognizes that in addition to making a
multiaxial diagnosis and standardized formulation, there is a requirement in each case to also make a personalized ideographic formulation
which explains the unique set of biopsychosocial factors contributing to each patient's specific difficulties; the patient's unique profile of


personal and contextual strengths; and a prognostic statement of expected outcome for the case. Treatment planning should be based on
both the standardized and personalized formulations. Thus, clinicians should draw on available evidence from controlled trials in selecting
the components of their overall treatment plan, but this should be tailored to the needs of the individual patient through reference to their
idiographic formulation.
Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual (PDM)
The Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual (PDM) was written by the Alliance of Psychoanalytic Associations (2006). The alliance includes
the International Psychoanalytical Association, the American Psychoanalytic Association, the American Academy of Psychoanalysis and
Dynamic Psychiatry, Division 39 of the American Psychological Society and the National Membership Committee on Psychoanalysis in
Clinical Social Work. The PDM is intended to complement the ICD and DSM classification systems by providing detailed psychodynamically
informed descriptions of both healthy and disordered personalities and symptom patterns, and profiles of mental functioning that include
patterns of relating, comprehending and expressing feelings. PDM multiaxial formulations may guide psychodynamic treatment.
The PDM is divided into three parts. Part I offers a classification of adult disorders, part II a classification of child and adolescent
disorders, and part III conceptual and research foundations for a psychodynamically based classification for mental health disorders. The
PDM incorporates a multiaxial system. In part I, for adult disorders, distinctions are made between P, M and S axes. Personality patterns
and disorders are classified on the P axis, mental functions on the M axis and subjective experience of symptom patterns on the S axis.
On the P axis, personality functioning may range from healthy to neurotic to borderline. In PDM the term borderline refers not to a
disorder but to a level of personality organization that is more maladaptive than a neurotic level of organization and less maladaptive
than a psychotic level of organization. Personality disorders on the P axis include schizoid, paranoid, psychopathic, narcissistic, sadistic,
masochistic, depressive, somatizing, dependent, phobic, anxious, obsessive-compulsive, hysterical and dissociative. The level of mental

functioning, which is classified on the M axis, may range from optimal mental capacities to major defects in mental functions. Mental
functions include the capacity for regulation, attention and learning; the capacity for relationships; the quality of internal experience
including confidence and self-regard; affective experience, expression and communication; defensive patterns and capacities; capacity to
form internal representations; capacity for differentiation and integration; self-observing capacities or psychological-mindedness; and the
capacity for internal standards, ideals and a sense of morality. The subjective experience of symptom patterns is coded on the S axis.
Here descriptions are given of what it feels like to have a particular disorder in terms of associated affects, cognitions, somatic states and
interpersonal experience. A range of disorders are covered including adjustment disorders, anxiety disorders, dissociative disorders, mood
disorders, eating disorders, psychogenic sleep disorders, sexual and gender identity disorders, factitious disorders, impulse control disorders,
substance abuse disorders, psychotic disorders and mental disorders based on a general medical condition.
In part II of the PDM, which focuses on children and adolescent disorders, distinctions are made between PCA, MCA and SCA axes,
which correspond to the P, M and S axes in part I. In part II, details of levels of functioning, list of disorders and descriptions of disorders
take account of developmental differences between young people and adults. There is also a special section on disorders in infancy
and early childhood in part II of the PDM. The primary diagnoses include interactive disorders that involve symptom patterns such as
anxiety, depression and disruptive behaviours; regulatory-sensory disorders which involve symptoms such as inattention, over- and under-
reactivity and sensory-seeking; and neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
Part III of the PDM consists of well-referenced chapters that address the history of psychoanalytically based nosology and psychoanalytic
therapy research; diagnostic measures for assessing psychotherapeutically induced personality change; research findings concerning the
effectiveness of psychodynamic psychotherapy and indications for undertaking it; and psychodynamic conceptualizations of normal and
abnormal development. This section provides conceptual and empirical support for parts I and II of the PDM.
In the PDM multiaxial system, the P axis is placed first and takes prominence because of extensive evidence that effective treatment of
symptoms in individuals with personality disorders must target personality disorders rather than episodic symptoms. Personality disorders

are described in ways that may inform psychodynamic treatment, with explicit reference to temperamental, thematic, affective, cognitive
and defence patterns. The psychopathic personality for example has aggressiveness and a high threshold for emotional stimulation as a key
temperamental factor. The main thematic preoccupation is manipulating or being manipulated. The central affects are rage and envy. The
characteristic core belief about the self is, 'I can make anything happen' and about others is 'Everyone is selfish, manipulative and dishonest.'
Central ways of defending are reaching for omnipotent control over others. For each disorder, where there is sufficient evidence, the PDM
makes explicit treatment suggestions.
There are no data on the reliability of the PDM. In contrast, there are grounds for being optimistic about its validity. Parts I and II of the PDM
are annotated and include lists of references to relevant theoretical discussions and research studies. This indicates that the decision-making
process of PDM work groups was guided by conceptual frameworks and empirical findings suggesting that PDM categories will be validated
and will be a useful resource for guiding psychodynamic treatment.
Research domain criteria (RDOC)
In the US, the failure of neurobiological diagnosis-based research to validate diagnostic categories led the National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH) to cease funding research based exclusively on DSM diagnostic categories and to develop RDOC, which is a dimensional framework
to guide future research, particularly neurobiological research, on developmental psychopathology (Cuthbert & Insel, 2013). The principal
systems within the RDoC matrix are negative valence systems (e.g. fear, anxiety and loss), positive valence systems (e.g. reward learning),
cognitive systems (e.g. attention, perception and working memory), systems for social processes (e.g. attachment and communication) and
arousal systems (e.g. sleep-wake cycle). In each of these domains researchers will identify the genetic, physiological and cognitive factors
that subserve variation along behavioural dimensions on which clinical and non-clinical cases are distributed. This body of knowledge


will eventually throw light on how dysfunctions in these underlying systems lead to difficulties such as internalizing and externalizing
behaviour problems.
Epidemiology
While the classification of psychological disorders addresses the question 'How many different sort of problems are there?' the central
question for epidemiology is 'How many people in the population have these problems?' Epidemiology is also concerned with the
identification of factors associated with the distribution of diagnoses within populations. Data on the overall prevalence of psychological
problems from reviews of major national surveys from countries around the world are given in Table 2.3. From the table it may be seen that
in any year about one of four people meets the ICD or DSM diagnostic criteria for a psychological disorder. Anxiety and personality disorders
are more prevalent than depressive or substance use disorders, and under 1% of the population meet the criteria for schizophrenia.
Psychological disorders have clear demographic correlates (Baxter et al., 2013; Baumeister & Härter, 2007; Ferrari et al., 2013; Saha et
al., 2005; Samuels, 2011). Women have higher rates of depressive and anxiety disorders and men have higher rates of drug and alcohol
dependence. Rates of schizophrenia are similar for men and women. Younger people have higher rates of disorders, especially drug and
alcohol dependence. Married people, employed people and people with more education have lower rates of all disorders. In community
surveys about 40-50% of the people who meet the diagnostic criteria for one disorder also meet the criteria for another disorder, and about
a fifth of people in community surveys meet the criteria for three or more disorders (Kessler & Wang, 2008). People with multiple comorbid
disorders have greater disability, are more intensive service users and are poorer responders to treatment (Andrews et al., 2002). Personality
disorders are more prevalent among males than females, younger than older people, and those who are unmarried rather than married.
Table 2.3 Epidemiology of psychological disorders


Any disorder
Baumeister & Härter
(2007)
5
25%
–
Anxiety
Baxter et al. (2013)
87
11.6%
7.3%
Depression
Ferrari et al. (2013)
116
3.7%
4.7%
Alcohol and substance use
Baumeister & Härter
5
7.8%
–
(2007)
Personality disorders
Samuels (2011)
5
9.56
–
Schizophrenia
Saha et al. (2005)
188
0.33%
0.46%

Summary
Currently ICD-10 and DSM-5 classification systems are used to facilitate clinical practice, communication and research. In DSM-5 and ICD-10 the number of conditions listed and the organization of these into groups are not the same, although some attempt at harmonization is expected with the publication of ICD-11. The Clinical Division of the British Psychological Society proposed that that DSM and ICD are flawed at a scientific level and also have a negative impact on service users. At a scientific level they lack reliability, validity, clinical utility and overemphasize biological factors at the expense of contextual factors. They also lack sensitivity to cultural and other types of diversity. With regard to their negative impact on clients they lead to discrimination, social exclusion, stigmatization, disempowerment and over-reliance on medication. In the US, Allen Frances has criticized DSM-5 for medicalizing normal behaviour to provide financial gain for the profession of psychiatry and pharmaceutical companies. The problems with DSM and ICD may be due to the dimensional distribution of most psychological problems within the population and the fact that most psychological difficulties are associated with a complex constellation


of predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors which are not symptom cluster-specific. Alternative approaches to
conceptualizing psychological problems include dimensional frameworks, the IGDA, PDM and RDOC. Epidemiological studies indicate that
about one in four adults in any 12-month period meets the diagnostic criteria for a DSM or ICD disorder. Prevalence rates for specific
disorders vary with demographic factors including gender, age, educational level, employment status and marital status.
Exercise
Work in pairs adopting roles of interviewer and interviewee and reverse roles when the interview is over. The interviewer should invite the
interviewee to describe a minor difficulty he or she had in the past 5 years. Then, identify the predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and
protective factors that were associated with this minor difficulty.
Further reading for clinicians
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Association.
Beutler, L., & Malik, M. (2002). Rethinking the DSM: A Psychological Perspective. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Kinderman, P. (2014). A Prescription for Psychiatry: Why We Need a Whole New Approach to Mental Health and Wellbeing. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
World Health Organization (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Geneva: WHO.


Assessment instruments
Baer, L., & Blaid, M. (2012). Handbook of Clinical Rating Scales and Assessment in Psychiatry and Mental Health. New York: Humana Press.
First, M., Spitzer, R., Gibbon, R., & Williams, J. (1997). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders (SCID-I), Clinician
Version. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press. Retrieved from http://www.appi.org
First, M., Spitzer, R., Gibbon, R., & Williams, J., & Benjamin, L. (1997). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis II Personality
Disorders (SCID-II). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Loranger, A., Janca, A., & Sartorius, N. (1999). The ICD-10 International Personality Disorder Examination (IPDE). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Retrieved from http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/41912/1/9780521041669.pdf?ua=1
Rush, J., First, M., & Blacker, D. (2007). Handbook of Psychiatric Measures (Second Edition). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing.
World Health Organization (1992b). Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry. Geneva: WHO. Retrieved from http://
whoscan.org/
World Health Organization (1997a). Composite International Diagnostic Interview. Version 2. (CIDI). Geneva: WHO. Retrieved from http://
www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/wmhcidi/about.php


Websites
ICD: http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/, http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/bluebook.pdf
DSM-5: http://www.dsm5.org/Pages/Default.aspx, http://www.psychiatry.org/dsm5
PDM: www.pdm1.org/
RDoC: http://www.nimh.nih.gov/research-priorities/rdoc/index.shtml
References
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1952). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1968). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Second Edition (DSM-II).
Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1980). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition (DSM-III). Arlington,
VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1987). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised (DSM-III-R).
Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV).
Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-
IV-TR). Arlington, VA: Author.


American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Andrews, G., Slade, T., & Issakidis, C. (2002). Deconstructing current comorbidity: Data from the Australian national survey of Mental
Health and Well-being. British Journal of Psychiatry, 181, 306-314.
Barham, P., & Hayward, R. (1995). Re-Locating Madness: From the Mental Patient to the Person. London: Free Association books.
Bassman, R. (2007). A Fight to Be: A Psychologist's Experience from Both Sides of the Locked Door. New York: Tantamount Press.
Baumeister, H., & Härter, M. (2007). Prevalence of mental disorders based on general population surveys. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 42, 537-546.
Baxter, A. J., Scott, K. M., Vos, T., & Whiteford, H. A. (2013). Global prevalence of anxiety disorders: A systematic review and meta-
regression. Psychological Medicine, 43, 897-910.
Bayer, R. (1987). Homosexuality and American Psychiatry: The Politics of Diagnosis. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Beck, A., Rush, A., Shaw, B., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive Therapy of Depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Bentall, R. (2004). Madness Explained. London: Penguin.
Bentall, R. (2009). Doctoring the Mind. Why Psychiatric Treatments Fail. London: Penguin.
Beresford, P. (2013). Experiential knowledge and the reconception of madness. In S. Coles, S. Keenan, & B. Diamond (Eds.), Madness
Contested: Power and Practice. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
Berganza, C. E., Mezzich, J. E., Otero-Ojeda, A. A., Jorge, M. R., Villaseñor-Bayardo, S. J., & Rojas-Malpica, C. (2001). The Latin American
guide for psychiatric diagnosis: A cultural overview. Psychiatric Clinics of North America. Special Issue: Cultural psychiatry: International
perspectives, 24, 433-446
Beutler, L., & Malik, M. (2002). Rethinking the DSM. A Psychological Perspective. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Boyle, M. (2002). Schizophrenia: A Scientific Delusion? (Second Edition). Hove: Routledge.


Boyle, M. (2013). The persistence of medicalisation: Is presentation of alternatives part of the problem? In S. Coles, S. Keenan, & B.
Diamond (Eds.), Madness Contested: Power and Practice (pp. 3-22). Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
British Psychological Society, Division of Clinical Psychology (2011). Response to the American Psychiatric Association: DSM-5
Development. Leicester: British Psychological Society.
Brown, G. (2009). Medical sociology and issues of aetiology. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, & J. Geddes (Eds.), New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry (Volume 1, pp. 268-275). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Busfield, J. (1996). Men, Women, and Madness: Understanding Gender and Mental Disorder. London: Macmillan.
Campbell, J., O'Rourke, M., & Slater, M. (2011). Carving Nature at Its Joints. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books.
Carr, A. (2009). What Works with Children, Adolescents and Adults? A Review of Research on the Effectiveness of Psychotherapy. London:
Routledge.
Carr, A. (2011). Positive Psychology. The Science of Happiness and Human Strengths (Second Edition). London: Brunner-Routledge.
Chinese Medical Association. (1995). Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders (Second Edition, Revised). Nanjing: Nanjing Dong Nan
University Press.
Corrigan, P., Roe, D., & Tsang, H. (2011). Challenging the Stigma of Mental Illness. Chichester: Wiley.
Cromby, J., Harper, D., & Reavey, P. (2013). Psychology, Mental Health and Distress. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cuthbert, B., & Insel, T. (2013). Toward the future of psychiatric diagnosis: The seven pillars of RDOC. BMC Medicine, 11, 126.
Deegan, P. E. (1993). Recovering our sense of value after being labelled mentally ill. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health
Services, 31, 7-11.
De Raad, B., & Perugini, M. (2002). Big Five Assessment. Bern, Switzerland: Hogrefe & Huber.
Edvardsen, J., Torgersen, S., Røysamb, E., Lygren, S., Skre, I., Onstad, S., . (2008). Heritability of bipolar spectrum disorders. Unity or
heterogeneity? Journal of Affective Disorders, 106, 229-240.


Estroff, S. (1993). Identity, disability and schizophrenia: The problem of chronicity. In S. Lindenbaum & M. Lock (Eds.), Knowledge, Power,
and Practice: The Anthropology of Medicine and Everyday Life (pp. 247-286). Berkeley: University of California.
Fernando, S. (2010). Mental Health, Race and Culture (Third Edition). Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Ferrari, A. J., Somerville, A. J., Baxter, A. J., Norman, R., Patten, S. B., Vos, T., & Whiteford, H. A. (2013). Global variation in the prevalence
and incidence of major depressive disorder: A systematic review of the epidemiological literature. Psychological Medicine, 43, 471-481.
First, M. (2009). Harmonisation of ICD-11 and DSM-V: Opportunities and challenges. British Journal of Psychiatry, 195, 382-390.
First, M., Spitzer, R., Gibbon, R., & Williams, J. (1997). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis I Disorders (SCID-I), Clinician
Version. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Frances, A. (2013). Saving Normal. An Insider's Revolt Against Out-Of-Control Psychiatric Diagnosis, DSM-5, Big Pharma, and the
Medicalization of Ordinary Life. New York: Harper Collins.
Hodapp, R., Griffin, M., Burke, M., & Fisher, M. (2011). Intellectual disabilities. In R. Sternberg & S. Kaufman (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook
of Intelligence (pp. 193-209). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Honos-Webb, L., & Leitner, L. M. (2001). How using the DSM causes damage: A client's report. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 41, 36-
56.
Ingram, R., & Price, J. (2010). Vulnerability to Psychopathology. Risk Across the Lifespan (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Johnstone, L. (2000). Users and Abusers of Psychiatry (Second Edition). London: Routledge.
Kessler, R., & Wang, P. (2008). The descriptive epidemiology of commonly occurring mental disorders in the United States. Annual
Review of Public Health, 29, 115-129.


Kinderman, P. (2014). A Prescription for Psychiatry: Why We Need a Whole New Approach to Mental Health and Wellbeing. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Kirk, S., & Kutchins, H. (1994). The myth of the reliability of the DSM. Journal of Mind and Behaviour, 15, 71-86.
Kraepelin, E. (1899). Psychiatrie (Sixth Edition). Leipzig: Barth.
Longden, E. (2010). Making sense of voices: A personal story of recovery. Psychosis: Psychological, Social and Integrative Approaches, 2,
255-259.
Masten, A. (2013). Risk and resilience in development. In P. Zelazo (Ed.), Oxford Handbook of Developmental Psychology. Volume 2. Self and
Other (pp. 579-607). New York: Oxford University Press.
May, R. (2000). Routes to recovery from psychosis: The roots of a clinical psychologist. Clinical Psychology Forum, 146, 6–10.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr (2008). The five-factor theory of personality. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of
Personality: Theory and Research (Third Edition, pp. 159–181). New York: Guilford Press.
McGoldrick, M., Carter, B., & Garcia-Preto, N. (2011). The Expanded Family Lifecycle. Individual, Family and Social Perspectives (Fourth
Edition). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Meyer, G. (2002). Implications of information gathering methods for a refined taxonomy of psychopathology. In L. Beutler & M. Malik
(Eds.), Rethinking the DSM: A Psychological Perspective (pp. 69–105). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Mezzich, J., Berganza, M., Von, Cranach, M., Jorge, M., Kastrup, M., Murphy, R., ... Zaudig, M. (2003). Essentials of the World Psychiatric
Association's International Guidelines for Diagnostic Assessment (IGDA). British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, Supplement 45.
Moncrieff, J. (2008). The Myth of the Chemical Cure. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Newnes, C., Holmes, G., & Dunn, C. (1999). This Is Madness. A Critical Look at Psychiatry and the Future of Mental Health Services. Ross-on-
Wye: PCCS Books.
Otero, A. (2000). Tercer Closario Cubano de Psiquiatria (Third Cuban Glossary of Psychiatry). Havana: Psychiatric Hospital.


Paris, J. (1996). Social Factors in The Personality Disorders. A Biopsychosocial Approach to Aetiology and Treatment. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Patel, N., Bennett, E., Dennis, M., Dosanjh, N., Mahtani, A., Miller, A., & Nadirshaw, Z. (2000). Clinical Psychology, Race and Culture. A
Training Manual. Leicester: British Psychological Society.
PDM Taskforce. (2006). Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual. Silver Springs, MD: Alliance of Psychoanalytic Organizations.
Rapley, M., Moncreif, K., & Dillon, J. (2011). Demedicalizing Misery. Psychiatry, Psychology, and the Human Condition. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Rapp, C., & Goscha, R. (2006). The Strengths Model: Case Management with People with Psychiatric Disabilities (Second Edition). New York,
Oxford University Press.
Read, J., Haslam, N., Sayce, L., & Davies, E. (2006). Prejudice and schizophrenia: A review of the 'mental illness is an illness like any other'
approach. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 114, 303-318.
Rietkerk, T., Boks, M., Sommer, I., Liddle, P., Ophoff, R., & Kahn, R. (2008). The genetics of symptom dimensions of schizophrenia: Review
and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 102, 197-205.
Rothbart, M., & Ahadi, A. (1994). Temperament and the development of personality. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 55-66.
Rutter, M. (2013). Annual research review: Resilience-Clinical implications. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 474-487.
Saha, S., Chant, D., Welham, J., & McGrath, J. (2005). A systematic review of the prevalence of schizophrenia. PLoS Medicine, 2, 413-433.
Samuel, D. B., & Widiger, T. A. (2008). A meta-analytic review of the relationships between the five-factor model and personality
disorders: A facet level analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 1326-1342.
Samuels, J. (2011). Personality disorders: Epidemiology and public health issues. International Review of Psychiatry, 23, 223-233.
Smail, D. (2005). Power, Interest and Psychology. Elements of a Social Materialist Understanding of Distress. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.


Stith, S., McCollum, E., Rosen, K., Locke, L., & Goldberg, P. (2005). Domestic violence focused couples treatment. In J. Lebow (Ed.),
Handbook of Clinical Family Therapy (pp. 406-430). New York: Wiley.
Szasz, T. (2010). Psychiatry, anti-psychiatry, critical psychiatry: What do these terms mean? Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, 17,
229-232.
Taylor, D., Paton, C., & Kapur, S. (2014). The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (Twelfth edition). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Terkelsen, T. B. (2009). Transforming subjectivities in psychiatric care. Subjectivity, 27, 195-216.
Uher, R., & Rutter, M. (2012). Basing psychiatric classification on scientific foundation: Problems and prospects. International Review of
Psychiatry, 24, 591-605.
Ungar, M., Ghazinour, M., & Richter, J. (2013). Annual research review: What is resilience within the social ecology of human
development? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 348-366.
Westen, D., Heim, A., Morrison, K., Patterson, M., & Campbell, L. (2002). Simplifying diagnosis using a prototype-matching approach:
Implications for the next edition of the DSM. In L. Beutler & M. Malik (Eds.), Rethinking the DSM: A Psychological Perspective (pp. 221-250).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Widiger, T. A., & Mullins-Sweatt, S. N. (2010). Clinical utility of a dimensional model of personality disorder. Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 41, 488-494.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1949). Manual of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death,
Sixth Revision. (ICD-6). Geneva: Author.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and
Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva: Author.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1993). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva: Author.


World Health Organization (WHO). (1996). Diagnostic and Management Guidelines for Mental Disorders in Primary Care. The ICD-10
Chapter V Primary Care Version. Gottingen: Author (Hogrefe and Huber)
World Health Organization (WHO). (1997a). Multiaxial Presentation of ICD-10 for Use in Adult Psychiatry. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1997b). Composite International Diagnostic Interview—Version 2.1 (CIDI). Geneva: Author.
www.who.int/msa/cidi/

Chapter 3 Cognitive behaviour therapy
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-3
The cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) tradition incorporates a range of psychotherapeutic theories and practices including behaviour
therapy, behaviour modification, cognitive therapy and cognitive behaviour therapy, all of which have their roots in learning theories
(Rachman, 1997). Within CBT it is assumed that problematic thoughts, feelings and behaviour patterns are learned through the same
processes as normal thoughts, feelings and behaviour. These learning processes include operant and classical conditioning and various
cognitive processes such as modelling and identification. Therapy involves coaching clients to replace problematic habits with more
adaptive ways of thinking, feeling, behaving and interacting with others. This coaching process is based on the principles of learning
theory. The small constituent habits that make up psychological disorders are identified through careful interviewing and observation. The
personal and situational antecedents, the co-occurring psychological states, and the personal and situational consequences associated with
problematic habits are identified. Specific CBT treatment programmes are designed for specific problems and the efficacy and effectiveness
of these empirically evaluated. CBT programmes typically include interventions that alter antecedents which signal the onset of problematic
thoughts, feelings and behaviour; interventions that challenge non-adaptive beliefs and styles of information processing that accompany
problematic behaviour; and interventions that change the consequences of problematic thoughts, feelings and behaviour so that more

adaptive alternatives to problematic patterns are developed and reinforced. Evidence from treatment outcome studies provide support for
the efficacy and effectiveness of CBT for depression and anxiety disorders (Nathan & Gorman, 2007). CBT is also an effective component of
multimodal treatment programmes for bipolar disorder, positive psychotic symptoms, pain management, management of some illnesses,
and problems associated with some personality disorders, particularly borderline personality disorder (Carr, 2009).
Learning processes and problem development
Within the CBT tradition it is assumed that psychological problems are acquired and may be altered through a series of learning processes.
These include
• Operant conditioning
• Classical conditioning
• Learning involving various cognitive processes.
Operant conditioning
The application of Skinner's (1957) principles of operant conditioning to understanding the aetiology and modification of problem
behaviour began in the US with pioneering work by a number of people including Ayllon and Azrin (1968) and Ullman and Krasner (1965).
Within this framework, problematic behaviour is viewed as being maintained by the occurrence of specific antecedent conditions and/or by
specific consequences that follow problematic behaviour.
Antecedents of behavioural problems, referred to as setting events, discriminative stimuli or cues, are specific situations or stimuli that
regularly elicit problem behaviours. For example, in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), situations involving dirt or perceived threat of


contamination commonly elicit anxiety. Clients attempt to reduce anxiety by engaging in compulsive washing rituals that bring only
temporary relief. An effective treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder is exposure and response prevention. Here the client is exposed
to cues which elicit anxiety, but prevented from engaging in anxiety-reducing compulsive rituals. Initially anxiety increases but eventually
it subsides. CBT for OCD is discussed in Chapter 16.
Problematic behaviour may be maintained by two specific classes of consequences: positive reinforcement and negative reinforcement.
Positive reinforcement refers to situations where problematic behaviour is followed by a desired outcome or reward and this increases the
probability that the behaviour will recur. For example, clients with borderline personality disorder who experience emotional relief after
they cut their arms with a razor are more likely to do this again, because the sense of relief reinforces their arm-cutting behaviour. Responses
that are negatively reinforced, by leading to avoidance or escape from distressing situations, are also more likely to recur. For example,
chronic pain clients may find that sitting still allows them to avoid increasing the intensity of their pain, and so they are likely to do so
repeatedly. Responses that are not positively or negatively reinforced are less likely to recur and so are extinguished. Responses that are
punished may be temporarily suppressed.
In the field of adult mental health, token economies are a good example of a therapeutic intervention based on the principles of operant
conditioning (Ayllon & Azrin, 1968). Token economies have been used in residential settings for clients who have serious skills deficits,
for example people with a diagnosis of chronic schizophrenia. Clients earn reinforcers (tokens) by engaging in certain target adaptive
behaviours and tokens may be exchanged for items from a reinforcement menu of valued privileges. Pain behaviour programmes are
another example of the application of operant learning principles to health problems (Fordyce, 1976). In these programmes, service users
with chronic pain and constricted lifestyles are socially reinforced for engaging in adaptive behaviour but not reinforced for engaging in pain
behaviour.
When people are learning complex new skills, they are most likely to learn these rapidly and accurately if complex skills are broken
down into smaller, simpler subskills. When learning individual subskills, these are acquired more efficiently if successive approximations

to the subskill are reinforced through the process of shaping. Intermittent reinforcement is more effective than continuous reinforcement
in helping people learn new responses and skills. In CBT, when coaching clients in problem solving and communication, the subskills that
constitute these complex skills are taught one at a time and their application to easy and non-emotive topics occurs before tackling complex
emotionally charged problems. Also, successive approximations to these skills are reinforced to gradually shape skill development.
Within the psychotherapeutic relationship, operant learning principles may be usefully applied. Therapists may extinguish problematic,
destructive conversation by acknowledging it, but not selectively responding to it with intense interest. In contrast, therapists may reinforce
adaptive, flexible, solution-oriented conversation by selectively attending and responding to it with positive remarks and enquiries. Large
complex problems may be broken down into smaller, more manageable tasks, and successive approximations to plans for implementing
adaptive solutions to these may be positively reinforced by selectively responding to them in an encouraging way.
Classical conditioning
The application of Pavlov's principles of classical conditioning to understanding the aetiology and modification of problem behaviour,
notably anxiety, began with the work of Watson (1924) and Mowrer (1960) in the US, Eysenck (1960) in the UK and Wolpe (1958) in
South Africa. In classical conditioning theory, it is proposed that if a neutral conditioned stimulus (CS) is paired with a strongly feared
unconditioned stimulus (UCS) which elicits anxiety as an unconditioned response (UCR), then after one intense pairing or multiple less
intense pairings of the CS and UCS, subsequent exposure to the previously neutral CS elicits anxiety, which is a conditioned response (CR).
For example, a customer who was in his bank (CS) when a frightening robbery (UCS) occurred now experiences intense anxiety (CR) any
time he enters a bank. Thus, banks have become cues for anxiety. Classical conditioning theory also proposes that generalisation may occur
where the class of situations that are cues for anxiety broadens. So, the client just mentioned not only became frightened of going into banks,
but also of entering post offices and shops with high cash turnovers. Extinction, according to classical conditioning theory, occurs when the


person is exposed to the cue (CS) repeatedly in the absence of the UCS. However, one of the problems with anxiety is that people tend to avoid
situations that are cues for anxiety and so their anxiety does not extinguish (Mowrer, 1960).
Systematic desensitisation, which is based on classical conditioning, involves coaching clients in relaxation skills; creating a hierarchy of
feared imaginal and/or actual (in vivo) situations; and pairing exposure to these feared situations with relaxation, starting with the least
anxiety-provoking situation (Wolpe, 1958). Progress from one stage in the hierarchy to the next occurs when the feared situation no longer
elicits anxiety or avoidance; that is, when the conditioned anxiety response becomes extinct.
A problem with this very simple classical conditioning explanation of the development of phobias is that in some instances brief exposure
to a weak unconditioned stimulus can eventually lead to the emergence of a phobia. Eysenck's (1979) incubation theory attempts to
overcome the shortcomings of a simple classical conditioning explanation. He argued that anxiety initially develops through one trial
classical conditioning where a neutral object for which a person is biologically prepared to develop an extinction resistant fear (CS) is paired
with a strongly feared object (UCS) and this object elicits anxiety (UCR). Subsequent exposure to the previously neutral object (CS) elicits mild
anxiety (CR). Repeated brief exposure to this previously neutral object (CS) leads to an increase in fear through a process of incubation. Brief
exposure leads to anxiety (CR) which is effectively paired with the feared object, and on the next brief exposure even more fear is elicited.
Incubation is a positive feedback process where fear itself reinforces fear of the phobic object. This whole process occurs outside of cognitive
control. Eysenck also argued that people who are constitutionally more neurotic and introverted are more likely to develop phobic anxiety
through this incubation process. He also acknowledged that phobias develop only to a limited group of stimuli and that humans have
preparedness, as a result of evolutionary processes, to develop phobias to these through a process of classical conditioning (De Silva et al.,
1977). According to this theory, treatment for phobias involves either gradual exposure (systematic desensitisation), where clients confront
their feared situations gradually from least to most fearsome; or complete exposure (flooding), where clients confront their most feared
situation for an extended time period until anxiety subsides. Gradual exposure may be to the feared situation itself (in vivo) or to an image
of the feared situation (imaginal). Thus, three procedures may be used to treat phobias: in vivo desensitisation, imaginal desensitisation, and

flooding. The theory predicts that the two in vivo methods, in vivo desensitisation or flooding, should be more effective than imaginal
desensitisation. The use of relaxation skills or other coping strategies are only important insofar as they help the person tolerate remaining
in the presence of the feared object. There is still controversy over details of the incubation theory as an explanation for the aetiology of
phobias. However, a large body of research shows that exposure techniques such as desensitisation and flooding, particularly in vivo, are
very effective methods for treating phobias (Barlow et al., 2007).
Learning involving cognitive processes
While operant and classical conditioning theories of learning place the greatest emphasis on the role of proximal external antecedents and
consequences in acquiring psychological problems, cognitive learning theories and theories of cognitive therapy focus on the role of distal
developmental factors and intrapsychic factors in the acquisition and modification of problematic behaviour patterns, beliefs and emotions.
Cognitive theories of psychopathology, such as that of Aaron T. Beck (1976), propose that maladaptive schemas are formed during
challenging childhood experiences. These include exposure to early stressful life events, frustration of important needs, and observation
of or engagement in non-optimal early family relationships. A schema is a cluster of interconnected core beliefs about the self and others
in significant relationships, the nature of the world or the probable course of future events. From the core beliefs in a schema, various
problematic assumptions and rules develop. An assumption usually is conditional and takes the form of an "if A, then B" statement, for
example, "If I am not liked by everybody, then I am worthless." A rule usually takes the form, "I must be perfect, otherwise I am worthless." A
core belief, in contrast, can usually be articulated as an absolute statement, for example, "I'm worthless," "Other people are untrustworthy,"
or "The world is dangerous." Schemas with assumptions and beliefs about loss render people vulnerable to depression. Those with
assumptions and beliefs about pervasive, imminent danger render people vulnerable to anxiety disorders. With anger-management
difficulties, schemas involve assumptions and core beliefs about entitlement and fairness.


Assumptions and core beliefs from schemas associated with common axis I disorders and personality disorders are given in Table 3.1.
People have both adaptive and maladaptive schemas, and at any particular time some schemas are active and some are inactive or latent. For
episodes of axis I disorders to occur, such as depression or anxiety, latent maladaptive schemas are activated in adulthood by schema-related
major stressful life events. For example, experiences involving loss may activate depressive schemas. Once such latent schemas are activated,
minor day-to-day stresses may trigger negative automatic thoughts. Negative automatic thoughts in turn typically lead to problematic
mood states, problematic physiological changes associated with negative emotions, and problematic behaviour and interaction patterns.
Collectively these negative moods, physiological states, behaviour and interaction patterns confirm the non-adaptive world view entailed
by the schema and so maintain the person's axis I disorder. For example, a male client with a depressive schema held the assumption, "If
everyone does not like me, then I am unlovable." He passed a female friend in the street who did not say hello and had the automatic thought,
"She really hates me." His mood dropped. He kept his head down, avoided eye contact and hurried home rather than greeting her warmly and
humorously joking about her not saying hello. On his next trips out, he continued to avoid eye contact with others on the street, met fewer
people every day, and gradually became more isolated and depressed about being disliked and unloved. His negative view of himself was thus
confirmed. A diagram of the cognitive model is presented in Figure 3.1.
Table 3.1 Maladaptive schemas
Schema domain
Schema
Core expectations, predisposing parenting experiences and
sample beliefs

Disconnection and rejection
1
Abandonment/ instability
Expectation that attachment needs will not be met arising from
neglectful or abusive early parenting
You will abandon me because you are unreliable, or angry, or
favour someone else, or are about to die
2
Mistrust/abuse
I cannot trust you because you will hurt me
3
Emotional deprivation
You will not give me nurturance, or empathy or protection
4
Defectiveness shame
I am inferior because of my appearance, or because of my sexual
or aggressive urges and so you will reject me
5
Social isolation
I am different from others and do not belong
Impaired autonomy
6
Dependence and incompetence
Expectation that one will not function independently arising
from overprotective early parenting
I am unable to handle everyday responsibilities without your
help

7
Vulnerability to harm or
I am in imminent danger from becoming ill, going crazy, having
illness
a serious accident or being a crime victim
8
9
Enmeshment
Failure
Impaired limits
10
Entitlement and grandiosity
11
Other directedness
12
Lack of self-control
Subjugation
I cannot separate from my parents because they need me, but I
feel smothered and directionless
I have failed to achieve my potential at school or work and I am
stupid
Deficient in following through on personal goals and
commitments to others due to permissive early parenting
I am entitled to whatever I want because I am special and I want
power to control others
I can't control my behaviour or complete plans because my
appetites and impulses prevent me
Expectation that if meeting the need of others is prioritised,
regardless of frustration of personal needs for autonomy,
spontaneity and intimacy, then minimal personal needs for
attachment and safety will be met
If I suppress my wishes (which are probably not important to
you) and my anger at you for making me suppress my wishes,
then you will not abandon or hurt me, but I feel trapped because
you coerce me into subjugation

13
Self-sacrifice
If I suppress my wishes, and voluntarily meet your needs, then you will not abandon me or feel pain and I will not feel guilty or selfish, but I may end up feeling resentful
14
Approval-seeking
If I do all I can to meet your approval or get your attention and recognition or attain wealth and status, then you will not abandon me
Overvigilance and inhibition
Expectation that if high standards of performance and ethical behaviour are prioritised, regardless of frustration of needs for autonomy, spontaneity and intimacy, then minimal personal needs for attachment and safety will be met
15
Pessimism
Most important things in my life will probably go wrong, so I focus on the negative aspects of life and fear mistakes that will lead to personal and financial ruin without optimism
16
Emotional inhibition
If I suppress my positive emotions and desires (joy, sex, etc.), hide my emotional vulnerabilities and focus on rationality, then you will not abandon or criticise me
17
Hyper-criticalness
If I am not efficient and perfect and do not meet high ethical and achievement standards, then you will abandon or criticise me
18
Punitiveness
If I or others make a mistake, we deserve to be harshly punished and not forgiven
Note: Based on Young, J., Klosko, J. & Weishaar, M. (2003). Schema Therapy: A Practitioner's Guide. New York: Guilford. pp. 14-17.


Early life stress
Long separation from parent in early childhood lays foundation for schema
SCHEMA
Core belief
Sadness, withdrawal and lethargy confirm core belief
Recent life stress
Bereavement activates latent schema
'I'm worthless'
Assumption
'If people don't like me, I'm worthless'
(A) Activating event
'He didn't say hello'
(B) Automatic thought
'I'm no good, he doesn't like me'
(C) Consequences
Sadness, withdrawal and lethargy set up more activating events
Emotional
Sadness
Behavioural
Withdrawal
Physiological
Lethargy

Figure 3.1 Cognitive therapy model
Cognitive therapy also proposes that once schemas are activated, people become prone to interpreting ambiguous situations in
problematic ways. The various logical errors that they make are referred to as cognitive distortions, some of which are listed in Table 3.2.
CBT aims to train clients to monitor situations where negative automatic thoughts and cognitive distortions occur and to identify
underlying assumptions and core beliefs; to evaluate the validity of these; and to engage in activities both within therapy sessions
and between sessions that provide evidence to refute them. These include collecting evidence that is inconsistent with negative beliefs
and assumptions, achieving increasingly challenging goals so as to disprove negative beliefs and assumptions, and learning new coping
strategies to help master these challenges.
Evidence from experimental studies reviewed in Clark and Fairburn (1997) and Williams et al. (1997) provide support for some of the
mechanisms of problem development and resolution contained in CBT theory.
Clinicians who use cognitive therapy distinguish between "hot" cognitions that are strongly emotionally charged and "cold" cognitions
which are associated with less intense emotions. It is accepted clinical lore that more therapeutic progress occurs when clients work with
"hot" cognitions in CBT (Greenberger & Padesky, 1995). Within cognitive science, this clinical insight has been addressed by Teasdale (1997),
who distinguishes between specific propositional meanings and generic or schematic implicational meanings. For example, the specific
propositional meaning of the sentence "I feel worthless," is "At present I am not worth anything." In contrast, the generic or schematic
implicational meaning is difficult to convey in words but it might be something like this:
Table 3.2 Cognitive distortions
All-or-nothing thinking (or dichotomous thinking). Thinking in extreme categorical terms. For example, "Either I'm a success or a
failure."


Mental filter (or selective abstraction). Filtering our positive aspects of the situation, selectively focusing on the negative aspects of a
situation, and drawing conclusions from these. For example, "I made a mistake earlier today, so everything I did today was wrong."
Overgeneralisation. Generalising from one instance to all possible instances. For example, "I failed that stats exam so I'll never be any
good at stats."
Magnification or minimisation. Exaggerating or underemphasising the significance of an event. For example, "He said she didn't like me
so that must mean she hates me," or "He said he likes me, but he probably doesn't mean it."
Personalisation. Attributing negative feelings of others to the self. For example, "He looked really angry when he walked into the room, so
I must have done something wrong."
Emotional reasoning. Taking feelings as facts. For example, "I feel like the future is black so the future is hopeless."
Discounting the positives. Believing that positive personal characteristics or achievements do not count in overall self-evaluation. For
example, "I passed that exam, but that was just good luck, I'm really no good at stats."
Mind-reading. Assuming that others are reacting negatively to you without having evidence for this. For example, "Her silence means
that she doesn't like me."
Fortune telling. Predicting that things will turn out badly without having evidence to support this. For example, "I will probably not
enjoy the party."
Catastrophising. Erroneously predicting extreme distress on the basis of limited evidence. For example, "My heart is racing. I must be
going to have a heart attack."
Labelling. Identifying completely with situational shortcomings. For example, "I didn't just make a mistake, I proved that I'm a complete
fool."
Should and must statements. Making absolute statements about how the self or others ought to be. For example, "I should always be
perfect and he should be loving."
Note: Based on Beck, A. (1976). Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New York: International Universities Press; and Burns, D. (1999a). Feeling Good. The New
Mood Therapy. Revised and Updated. New York: Avon.


Lost and alone in a grey, grey land, on the edge of this arctic desert, my lover stands and then moves away without seeing me or caring, and I
know that tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow will unfold like a dark, windswept, wasteland without hope or light or love.
Sensory features such as tone, poetic features of language, facial expressions and bodily movements all convey implicational meaning
in addition to the propositional meaning of a statement. According to Teasdale, only generic or schematic implicational meanings are
directly linked to emotions. Specific propositional meanings are less strongly and directly linked to emotions. Thus, cognitive therapy
interventions which entail helping clients to marshal evidence for their worth by intellectually reviewing events that involved making a
positive contribution in work or family life may be useful in changing propositional meanings. However, such interventions probably have
limited impact on implicational meanings and long-term management of negative emotional states. In contrast, interventions that facilitate
clients actively and wholeheartedly engaging in tasks, the outcome of which provides evidence for their worth, are more likely to change
implicational meanings and to have a lasting effect on long-term mood management.

Assessment and formulation
The following description of CBT assessment, formulation and treatment is brief and oversimplified, but is based on more detailed and
comprehensive discussions of CBT practice to which readers are referred for a fuller account (Barlow, 2014; A. Beck, 1976; J. Beck, 2011a,
2011b; Burns, 1999a, 1999b; Clark & Fairburn, 1997; Greenberger & Padesky, 1995; Hawton et al., 1989; Padesky & Greenberger, 1995;
Young et al., 2003). CBT begins with engaging the client in an assessment process which leads to an individualised case formulation.
The development of a strong therapeutic relationship is central to this engagement process. Within cognitive therapy the therapeutic
relationship is one of collaborative empiricism. Therapist and client work together to gather evidence to develop and test out a CBT
formulation of the client's main difficulties. This formulation is a set of hypotheses about the development and maintenance of the client's
list of problems. A CBT formulation details the way antecedent factors (A), intervening beliefs (B); and emotional, physiological, behavioural

and cognitive consequences (C) maintain the client's main difficulties. This is often referred to as the ABC aspect or situational aspect of the
formulation.
The formulation also specifies the underlying schemas that render the client vulnerable to their problems; other biopsychosocial
vulnerabilities such as personality traits or genetic predispositions; and the stressful life events that triggered the onset of the current
episode of their psychological disorder or syndrome. This is often referred to as the syndromal aspect of the formulation.
In complex cases, particularly where clients have comorbid personality disorders, a full case formulation involves a set of formulations,
with one for each disorder specifying the ABCs for the main problems along with vulnerability factors and precipitating stresses for each
disorder.
In developing the formulation, the therapist helps the client through a socialisation process, to think about their psychological problems
in CBT terms. That is, the client is invited to accept that it is useful to recognise that a build-up of specific life stresses triggered their
current problems because they had certain specific personal vulnerabilities, and that their day-to-day difficulties are maintained by the
ABC connections. Clients learn that these maintaining factors are under their control and so can be changed though CBT. It follows from
this that individualised CBT formulations are used as a basis for treatment planning. Most CBT treatment plans are composed of a limited
number of procedures described later in this chapter. These procedures focus largely on monitoring and modifying ABC aspects of problem
formulations. Also, for most common problems, such as mood and anxiety disorders, empirically supported treatment protocols that
include effective problem-specific combinations of treatment procedures have been developed. Some of these protocols are described later in
this book.
As with all intake interviews, it is good practice in CBT to form a contract for assessment specifying one or more sessions; the location,
duration and timing of these; the importance of completing homework assignments, such as keeping a daily thought record or carrying
out a schedule of agreed, between-session activities; and bringing the results of homework to sessions for review. CBT is not a cure-all for
psychological problems. Available research evidence shows that certain CBT treatment protocols are useful for certain types of people with


certain specific problems. Thus, it is good practice to inform service users at the initial appointment that the assessment will be looking at,
among other things, their suitability for CBT.
Problem list
The first part of a formulation is the problem list. To establish the list, give clients an invitation to explain their situation and difficulties in
such a way that they feel free to give a narrative account of many or all of the difficulties they face with limited interruption. Here is one way
to offer such an invitation:
Your GP Dr Berkley wrote and asked me to offer you an appointment. He said that your mood had been low and that you were having a lot of
difficulties in your life. We have about an hour today to talk about these difficulties and for us to decide if this service might be useful to you.
One way to start would be for you to tell me what your main difficulties are now and the story of how these have developed during your life.
Can you tell me the story now please?
Some clients have difficulty giving a coherent self-directed narrative, and require more detailed questioning. Here are some questions that
may be asked to develop a problem list:
• What is the main problem that concerns you right now?
• What was the main difficulty you were facing that led you to contact our service?
• If I were to ask other people in your family/workplace what they thought the main problem was, what do you think they would say?
• Can you tell me more about that?
• When did the problem start?
• Has anything (including past treatment) made it worse or better?

To build an alliance with the client, periodically empathise with the client, using phrases like:
• That sounds very difficult.
• I can see that you have been through a very challenging time with these problems.
To track fluctuations in problems over time, it is useful to use quantitative scaling questions.
• On a scale of 1 to 10, how bad is the problem now?
• On a scale of 1 to 10, how bad was the problem yesterday morning (yesterday evening, last week, last month, last year, when you were in
such-and-such a situation)?
• How often does the problem occur each day (week, month, year)?
• Once the problem starts, how long does it go on for, how many minutes (hours, days, weeks, months)?
All of these types of enquiries may be followed up with probes like:
• Can you say more about that?
• Is there more that you would like to say about that?
Sometimes, it is useful to ask the client to recount a specific episode or incident to illustrate:
• Can you give me a specific example of that?

Periodically, summarise what clients have said and check the accuracy of this, to indicate that you are following and making sense of their
story and that you want to get an accurate picture of their situation. For example:
From what you've said so far, it seems to me that after you lost your job about a year ago, you became very sad, because it was not just a job.
It was one of the most important things in your life. And at home, no-one understood this, so you found yourself withdrawing from your
husband and children and spending more and more time on your own. Then, there were two episodes in the past six months, where you felt
as if you were going to have a heart attack: one at the post office and one on a bus on the motorway. Since these, you have been frightened to
go out without your husband. Have I got that part right?
Standardised self-report instruments and rating scales such as the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996) and Beck Anxiety
Inventory (BAI; Beck & Steer, 1990) may also be used to identify difficulties for inclusion on the problem list. Common difficulties for
problem lists include suicidal ideation, drug misuse, depressive symptoms as indicated by a high BDI score, anxiety symptoms as indicated
by a high BAI score, difficulty leaving the house, medical difficulties such as diabetes, family problems such as marital discord or violence,
occupational problems such as unemployment, and accommodation problems such as inadequate housing.
In some contexts it may be appropriate to write to clients and ask them to write out the list of problems with which they want help and
complete some screening inventories such as the BDI and BAI and post these in to the clinic before their first appointment.
Diagnoses and prioritising problems
As the problem list unfolds in an intake interview, it is worth thinking about whether clusters of problems might be interrelated and reflect
a single disorder or syndrome. This process of clustering or grouping problems is challenging. Clinicians in training may wish to defer this
process until the end of the first interview. With experience this process becomes easier. Thus, it may be more useful initially to move from
constructing a problem list to ABC problem analysis, and then to go back to problem grouping and diagnosis after the first interview.

The multiple problems on a problem list should be grouped and ordered in a clinically meaningful way, and where appropriate, diagnoses
given according to criteria in the locally used system, that is, ICD-10 (WHO, 1992) or DSM-5 (APA, 2013). For example, suicidal ideation,
depressive symptoms and sleep problems might all be grouped together as evidence for an episode of major depression. Anxiety symptoms,
panic attacks, and difficulty leaving the house might be grouped together as evidence of panic disorder with agoraphobia. Chronic history of
difficulties with independence and related difficulties might be coded dependent personality disorder.
In prioritising problems or syndromes to be addressed, those that place that client at risk of harming themselves or others should always
be given first priority. Problems that may prevent the client from engaging in therapy, for example, not taking essential medication such as
lithium for bipolar disorder, should be the next priority. Problems that are a priority of the client should immediately follow problems in
these first two categories.
ABC problem analysis
Some problems, such as difficulties arranging transport to therapy, require management rather than formulation and therapy. However,
most psychological difficulties are amenable to ABC analysis. That is, for any instance of the problem, it is usually possible to
identify antecedent situational cues, intervening automatic thoughts, and psychological consequences. Situational antecedents include the
environmental cues or interpersonal context within which problems occur. Automatic thoughts are the transient negative self-statements
that are made in response to the situational antecedents. The consequences of situational antecedents and related negative automatic
thoughts include changes in mood, such as increased depression, anxiety or anger. Typically, these mood changes involve physiological
changes such as increases or decreases in arousal. They may also involve behavioural changes such as social withdrawal, avoidance or
violence. Changes in the environment or the social context may also occur. For example, others may offer increased attention or withdraw.
These environmental and contextual changes may in turn reinforce the problem behaviour, beliefs and mood states. An ABC problem
analysis can be conducted by observing a client go through a micro-episode of problem behaviour within the consulting room. For example, a

person with obsessive-compulsive disorder could be exposed to cues, such as dirt, that trigger obsessional thoughts and compulsive washing
behaviour within an intake interview session. A second option is to invite clients to complete self-monitoring homework tasks, described
later. A third option is to conduct a detailed ABC problem analysis interview using a line of questioning like this for each problem:
• Can you describe the last time the problem happened?
• What did you notice first?
• What happened next?
• What went through your mind in that situation?
• What story did you tell yourself about the situation?
• How did that make you feel?
• On a 10-point scale, how much did your mood (anxiety, anger) go up or down?
• How did other people in the situation react?
• What brought the situation to a close?
• What did you lose or gain as a result of the situation?
• What was it about the way the situation ended that makes it more likely to happen again?
After an ABC problem analysis, summarise the analysis and enquire about its accuracy:
Let me check if I have understood what happened on Wednesday correctly. You wanted to post the parcel, so you left your husband in the
supermarket and went across to the post office. While you were in the queue, you felt your heart racing and noticed you were short of breath.
You thought, "I'm going to have a heart attack." Just to check that you really were having serious heart trouble, you focused all your attention
on your racing heart, your shortness of breath, and the tingling feelings in your fingers. Then you noticed your heart rate accelerate. You

couldn't catch your breath. The room looked unreal and you felt dizzy, so you ran out of the post office and bumped into your husband who
was just opening the car door outside. You felt huge relief as he hugged you and helped you into the car and took you home. Gradually, your
heart rate dropped and you could breathe OK. During this episode your anxiety level went from zero in the supermarket, to six when you first
noticed your heart racing to ten when you left the post office and back to three when you were driving home. And you now believe that in
future you will not queue up in the post office in case you get another panic attack like that one. This is good because you now know how to
avoid panic attacks and have prevented any more from happening. But it's also a problem because you have been finding that you hardly go
out at all now and you have almost made yourself a prisoner in your own house. Is that what has happened?
In this section, ABC problem analysis has been presented as a relatively simple process. However, it can be quite complex. For example, in
situations where clients with social phobia are required to interact with others (A), many believe that they will be negatively evaluated (B),
and so adopt safety behaviours (avoiding eye contact, speaking quickly or evaluating what they have said) which impair their performance
and in doing so may elicit negative feedback from others (C). They also focus their attention on interoceptive cues (such as increased
heart and respiration rates) (A) and use these as a basis for forming an impression of how others view them (B) which in turn increases
arousal, impairs their performance and elicits negative feedback from others (C), which confirms their beliefs that others will evaluate them
negatively. For generalised anxiety disorder, a wide range of situations such as receiving a bank statement or an unexpected phone call or
having a cold leads the person to worry (A). They then find themselves worrying about the fact that they are worrying and believe that their
worrying is out of control (B). This may lead them to try to distract themselves or suppress their tendency to worry (C) which in turn leads to
an increase in worrying. Such complex ABC analyses associated with specific disorders are discussed later in this book.
Thought catching
One of the biggest challenges in learning to do an ABC analysis is teaching clients "thought catching," that is, helping them to access and
articulate negative automatic thoughts. If clients have difficulty with thought catching, set up a challenging situation or a role-play in the


consulting room or invite them to imagine with their eyes closed that they are in a difficult or challenging situation. Watch for behavioural
or physiological signs of a shift in their mood, such as a change in their facial expression or bodily position, eyes filling with tears or changes
in respiration, and then ask them one or more of the following questions:
• What was going through your mind just then?
• What did you just tell yourself?
• What do you guess you were thinking about just now?
• Were you thinking ... (suggest a possible automatic thought) ...?
• Were you thinking ... (suggest a thought that is definitely not their automatic thought, for example, "Ice cream is cold but nice")?
Sometimes automatic thoughts have a strong visual component and a weaker verbal component. In these situations, invite clients to
describe the image they see and what message it conveys to them.
Only some automatic thoughts have a critical impact on emotional state. These are referred to as "hot" thoughts. For example in the
automatic thought "this is hard, very tricky, I can't do it, I'm so stupid" the client saying "I'm so stupid" was the "hot" part of this automatic
thought. A central part of teaching clients thought catching is helping them learn to isolate and record their "hot" thoughts.
Precipitating, predisposing and protective factors
The ABC aspect of a CBT formulation explains how micro-episodes of the problem occur in day-to-day situations, and how these micro-
episodes maintain the problem. However, the syndromal aspect of a CBT formulation explains why the overall episode of the disorder
or syndrome occurred at this time for this client. To develop a syndromal formulation, precipitating stresses, predisposing vulnerability
factors, and protective factors need to be identified.


Precipitating factors
Stresses that precipitate episodes of a disorder may be broadly classified as
• Exit events, involving loss (e.g. bereavement or unemployment);
• Entrance events involving the formation of new relationships and assumption of new responsibilities (e.g. births, marriages, new
friendships or work situations);
• Illnesses and injuries;
• Other lifecycle transitions and changes (e.g. moving house or financial difficulties).
Stressful events that have precipitated the onset of the current and previous episodes of the disorder may be identified by inviting clients
to draw their lifelines, noting the periods when they had previous and current episodes of their disorder, and indicating the stressful life
events that preceded each episode. Lifelines are described in detail in Chapter 8.
Predisposing factors
Maladaptive schemas are the principal predisposing vulnerabilities of particular relevance to CBT syndromal formulations. These contain
problematic core beliefs (such as "I am inept") that inform automatic thoughts, of the type noted in ABC problem analysis (such as "I can't do
this"). These beliefs commonly concern the self, others, the world or the future. Schemas typically have their origins in early childhood and
arise from exposure to early stressful life events, frustration of important needs, and through modelling and identification in early family
relationships. A list of common schemas is given in Table 3.1. Schemas may be assessed with the Young Schema Questionnaire (Young,
2003). They may also be assessed using the downward or vertical arrow technique (Burns, 1999a). With this technique, write an automatic


thought identified in a common and recurring but specific situation (using ABC problem analysis) at the top of a page and beneath it draw a
downward arrow. Then write down the client's answer to this question beneath the downward arrow.
Assuming this thought is true, tell me why this thought is upsetting to you? What does it mean about you (or others, or the world, or the
future)?
Then draw a downward arrow beneath the answer and repeat the process a number of times until you arrive at the client's core belief. An
example of a downward arrow exercise is given in Figure 3.2.
Other vulnerability factors requiring assessment for a comprehensive CBT formulation include personality traits such as neuroticism and
genetic predispositions. Personality traits may be assessed with the Revised NEO Personality Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 1992). Genetic
predispositions may be assessed by taking a family history of psychological problems or drawing a genogram and noting blood relatives with
psychological problems (as described in Chapter 8).
I must work hard on
this assignment or I will fail
If I fail the assignment,
then I may fail the cour
That would mean I was a failure and
people would not think much of me
I'd feel very bad because I need
people to like me to feel OK
If people don't like me,
then I'm worthless
If that were true, why would it be upsetting?
What would it mean about you?
If that were true, why would it be upsetting?
What would it mean about you?
If that were true, why would it be upsetting?
What would it mean about you?
If that were true, why would it be upsetting?
What would it mean about you?

Figure 3.2 Downward arrow technique
Protective factors and suitability for treatment
The probability that a treatment programme will be effective is influenced by a variety of protective factors. It is important that these be
assessed and included in the later formulation, since it is protective factors that usually serve as the foundation for therapeutic change. For
CBT, particularly important protective factors are the capacity to form a good therapeutic relationship; accepting a CBT formulation of the
problem (rather than an exclusively biological formulation); and a willingness to follow through on homework assignments. Indeed, these
three protective factors may be considered the central criteria for assessing clients' suitability for treatment. Other more general protective
factors (elaborated on in Chapter 8) include a history of having coped well and recovered from previous episodes of the disorder, physical
health and fitness, high self-esteem, an internal locus of control, high self-efficacy, an optimistic attributional style, functional coping
strategies, good problem-solving skills, a good social support network, the capacity to make and maintain stable relationships and a low level
of life stress.
An example of a CBT formulation is given later in the section on contracting for treatment. An outline of the main headings in a
formulation is given in Table 3.3.
Treatment
Once intake assessment has been completed and a preliminary formulation has been constructed, the next step is to agree to a contract for
treatment. For clients to be able to commit to treatment contracts, it is vital that they understand and accept the CBT formulation of their
problems and agree with the treatment goals. Creating a context within which the client can commit to a treatment contract is important,
because for CBT to be effective the client must collaborate with the therapist within sessions and cooperatively follow through on homework

assignments between sessions. This is emotionally demanding and costly in terms of time or money or both, so it is worth taking time to
establish a solid treatment contract.
Table 3.3 Format for formulation summary
Problems
Problem list
Main diagnosis
Secondary diagnosis
Personality disorder
Maintaining factors
ABC analysis of main problems
Predisposing factors
Main schemas
Personality traits


Precipitating factors
Protective factors
Therapy goals
Biological vulnerabilities
Stresses that triggered current episode
Stresses that triggered past episodes
Capacity to engage in therapy
Health
Personality traits
Coping strategies
Social support
Premorbid adjustment

Contracting for treatment
In forming the contract, the first step is to summarise the list of problems that led the client to seek treatment; order and prioritise these in
a coherent way; and check them for accuracy. The second step is to offer the ABC aspect of the formulation of the main presenting problem,
and once again check this for accuracy. The third step is to offer the syndromal aspect of the formulation, pointing out the schemas and
related developmental experiences and genetic predispositions that rendered the client vulnerable to developing the current episode of the
problem following recent life stresses. An accuracy check should also be made at this point. The fourth step is to highlight strengths and
protective factors which suggest the client may benefit from CBT and to suggest certain areas in which specific goals might be set. Before
progressing to detailed goal setting, it is often useful to give the client an opportunity to discuss their reservations about committing to
a treatment contract and making it clear that you know that there are obstacles which may make it very difficult for the client to fully
cooperate with treatment and to follow through on homework assignments.
We are getting towards the end of this meeting, so it would be useful to check a few things with you at this point. The main difficulties that
you have been struggling with have been controlling your low mood, managing your sleep and keeping your energy up. These problems are
all related. They are all aspects of depression. The mood problem is your main concern. Can I check that that is the case? ... We looked at a few
situations where your mood is particularly low. These are situations where you try to handle demanding things at work or conflict at home.
These Activating events (the A's of the situation), spark off certain negative beliefs for you, like "I can't do it" or "they don't care about me
anymore" (the B's of the situation). These beliefs, these stories that automatically go through your mind, have clear consequences for your
mood (the C's of the situation). Your mood drops. You feel you have no energy. You withdraw. And this convinces you that you were right to
believe that you could not handle the situation. Can I check again, that this ABC sequence is what happens to you? ... Now an important
question is why you find yourself repeating this sort of pattern over and over again. From what you told me, my best guess is that when you
were promoted at work and your wife became ill and was hospitalised, these two stresses activated an old set of beliefs (a schema) that you

learned as child, when your mother went to hospital and you started school. Back then, you felt very sad, lost and alone. You made sense of
the situation by believing that you somehow were responsible for your mother going away and that if you did well at school and were very
popular with everyone, then your mother would return from hospital and care for you again. Does that fit for you? . . . Another part of the
puzzle is that you may also be vulnerable to developing mood problems, because you have inherited a nervous system that runs down under
pressure. From what you told me, your father, uncle and grandfather also had mood problems, and you may have inherited a disposition to
mood problems from them. Does that bit fit for you too? If you can accept this way of understanding your difficulties, then there are a number
of things that you can do to get control over your mood, improve your sleep and get your energy back. You can learn to change your thinking
style, so it's less pessimistic. You can increase your energy by gradually changing your daily activity routines. And you can learn some
exercises to help you sleep better. You can also consider antidepressant medication to help that part of your nervous system involved in mood
regulation speed up again. However, this sort of therapy is not a guaranteed cure. It only works for two out of three people. You have a number
of strengths that make me hopeful that you might be one of the lucky ones who can benefit from treatment. You're healthy and fit, motivated
to come to an intake interview, you think about your difficulties in a psychological way, and you have handled similar sorts of difficulties quite
well in the past. However, this type of programme is a lot of hard work, 10 sessions over 20 weeks. That's a big commitment of time (and
money). There will be homework assignments to do. That may be inconvenient. And so I could understand that you might not want to go
ahead with this right now. I need to check with you what your reservations are, and if you are ready to commit to all this hard work or not?
Where clients disagree with minor aspects of the formulation, it is valuable to take time to clarify inaccuracies and reach a shared and
consensual position. Where clients cannot accept the formulation and insist that their difficulties are a reflection of an exclusively biological
illness that can only be cured by medication, and think that CBT formulations and intervention will be of little value, arguing about the
relative validity of biomedical versus biopsychosocial models of disorders is of little value. It is helpful in these instances to say that CBT can
help people cope with the symptoms of a variety of biological illnesses, such as bipolar disorder, to relapse less frequently. The contract for
treatment in such instances involves helping the person learn coping strategies to cope with a medical condition.

Goal setting and monitoring
With goal setting, the aim is to define clear, unambiguous, visualizable, measurable, positively stated goals for problem resolution. These
goals allow the client and clinician to know in a concrete way when the presenting problems have been solved. Clients often state goals in
vague terms, so it is important to ask questions that require specific details when goal setting. Useful questions for goal setting are:
• If your problems were solved, what specifically would be different about the way you spend your day?
• If you no longer had these difficulties, and we were watching a videotape of an average day in your life, what would we see you doing that
you can't do now, but really want to be able to do?
Goals may also be framed as achieving a score below the clinical cut-off point on standardised scales such as the BDI or the BAI. Goals may
involve being able to carry out a typical activity of daily living without interference from a problem behaviour. For example, being able to
travel on public transport without having a panic attack. With problem drinking, it may be appropriate to set a maximum number of alcohol
units per week as a goal, and with anorexia the goal may be achieving a target weight. In CBT, progress towards goals should be monitored
regularly, for example weekly or monthly, using an agreed outcome measure. This is usually distinct from daily self-monitoring and diary
keeping, which will be described next.
Where disagreement occurs about goals, the client's priorities should be followed unless these entail significant risks or interfere with
therapy effectiveness. For example, managing imminent suicide risk or imminent risk of harm to others should always be a priority. Where
clients have major substance use problems or severe anorexia, these should be prioritised over other difficulties, since intoxication and
starvation interfere with the effectiveness of CBT.

Structuring sessions
Structure CBT sessions in the following way:
• Orientation to the structure of the session
• Check-in
• Set agenda
• Review homework
• Work through agenda
• Agree homework
• Summarise and request feedback.
Orientation
At the beginning of each session, let the client know the structure you intend to follow. Here is one way to do this.
Our meeting will last for an hour today and this is the way I suggest we use the time. We'll start by checking how you are now and how you
have been since we last met. Then, we'll agree on an agenda. One thing I want to put on the agenda is how you managed the homework we
discussed last week. You will probably have things you want to put on the agenda too. We'll try to cover most things on the agenda. And then
towards the end of the session we will agree your next homework assignment. We'll finish up with a recap of the ground we have covered and
I'll ask you for feedback on the session. Is that structure OK with you?


Check-in
The second task is to check how the client is now and how things have been since the last session. If self-report measures of symptoms,
rating scales or other indices of goal attainment have been completed, these should be checked too, and improvement or deterioration
should be noted. A common problem is for clients to move without agreement from the check-in process to discussing a recent crisis in
detail. If this begins to happen, indicate that a discussion of the recent crisis may be an important item to put on the agenda.
Set agenda
The third task is to set an agreed agenda which can realistically be completed within the time available. A typical agenda might include
homework review, discussion of coping with a recent crisis, planning for a challenge coming up in the near future and agreeing on
homework. Checking homework is usually the first item on the agenda and agreeing on a further homework assignment is often the last
item on the agenda. Between these two items, clients may be invited to include a couple of additional items, or clinicians may suggest items
that may be included on the agenda. In early sessions, therapists may actively suggest additional agenda items. In later sessions, clients may
be invited to take more responsibility for agenda setting. Usually agenda items are related to therapy goals and to significant aspects of a
client's current life situation that facilitate or impede goal attainment. The agenda should be set and items on it prioritised collaboratively.
Risky behaviour, including self-harm and violence, and behaviour that interferes with the effectiveness of therapy, such as difficulties
with completing homework assignments, should always be prioritised. When setting an agenda, the challenge is to keep the agenda short,
realistically manageable within the available time and relevant to goal attainment.
Work through the agenda
The fourth task is to work through the agenda. In reviewing homework (often the first item on the agenda) intermittent praise should


be given for successive approximations to well-completed homework assignments. Where assignments are incorrectly completed and the
problem is a skills deficit, corrective instruction should be given. Where assignments are partially completed or not completed at all,
obstacles to homework completion should be explored. Sometimes these obstacles are practical difficulties, such as being unable to manage
the competing demands of work, family life and homework assignments. However, often resistance to doing homework is related to
schemas about self and others, such as those listed in Table 3.1. Schemas associated with personality disorders that include assumptions
such as "I am stupid" or "I cannot trust you because you will hurt me" often make it difficult for clients to complete homework assignments.
In such cases, recognising these schemas, inviting clients to collect evidence to challenge these assumptions and learning to work around
them is critical if CBT is to be effectively used to deal with axis I disorders such as depression or anxiety (Young et al., 2003).
In working through items on the agenda such as managing a recent crisis or planning how to handle an upcoming challenge, the clinician's
role is to manage time effectively and to facilitate problem solving using the CBT techniques described later. There are many obstacles in
working through an agenda. Sometimes clients want to ventilate their feelings of sadness, anger, despondency and demoralisation for long
periods of time before moving into problem solving. It can be helpful to point out in an empathic way that this is occurring and asking if the
client wishes to use the therapy time to do this or focus on problem solving.
On other occasions, clients will stray from the agenda and talk about items unrelated to the agreed agenda. It can be helpful to point out
in an empathic way that this is occurring and invite the client to try to focus on the agenda items and possibly put the other items on the
agenda for the next session.
Agree homework
The fifth task in a structured session is to agree homework assignments. Follow these guidelines that make it more probable that clients will
follow through on invitations to complete homework:


1. Collaboratively design simple homework tasks to fulfil specific functions and begin the homework in the session.
2. Give a rationale for the homework linked to the work done in the session and overall treatment goals.
3. Offer invitations to carry out homework clearly in simple language, inviting clients to do specific things.
4. Describe homework briefly and break complex tasks into parts.
5. Check that the clients have understood the homework.
6. Emphasise the importance of homework.
7. Write down complex homework assignments.
8. Mention any potentially negative side effects of homework tasks and anticipate obstacles.
9. State that homework will be discussed at the next session and convey an expectation of cooperation and success.
10. Always review homework.
Summarise and request feedback
Throughout each session periodically summarise what has occurred. It is particularly important at the end of the session to summarise the
ground that has been covered and ask the client for feedback on helpful and unhelpful aspects of the session. Here is an example of such a
summary:
Today we reviewed your homework, and it's clear that you are mastering the relaxation exercises, but having difficulty remembering to do
them every day. We talked about you setting a fixed time of 9.30 each evening after the news to do them for the next fortnight. We spent most
of the session exploring the way you interpreted a number of situations as very threatening to you last week when you visited your sister. We
then agreed that for homework over the next week you would use this form to keep track of situations in which you experience anxiety, and

the sorts of automatic thoughts that lead you to feel anxious. Is that a fair summary? Can I just check with you, if there was anything that
you found particularly useful about today's session, and if there was anything that jarred a bit and was unhelpful?
Treatment strategies
Within CBT, a group of cognitive strategies may be identified, the primary aim of which is to modify negative automatic thoughts and
cognitive distortions and in doing so to alter negative mood states such as depression, anxiety and anger. Cognitive strategies also aim to
reduce vulnerability to relapse by modifying core beliefs and assumptions about self, others, the world and the future contained in the
underlying maladaptive schemas. Behavioural strategies, in contrast, aim to equip clients with skills to alter or cope better with activating
events or to engage in activities that have a direct and positive impact on emotional states and are intrinsically reinforcing. They include
scheduling activities, relaxation, pleasant events and physical exercise. Some of the more widely applicable CBT strategies are briefly
described later. These constitute a menu that clinicians draw from in tailoring individualised CBT programmes for particular clients. The
type of strategies chosen and the way in which they are sequenced should be determined by each client's formulation and treatment goals on
the one hand, and the results of treatment outcome studies on the other. CBT treatment protocols for specific clinical syndromes are given in
other chapters in this book.
Socratic questioning and guided discovery
Within CBT, for most therapeutic strategies, with the possible exception of skills training, the preferred interactional style is to use questions
to elicit adaptive responses from clients. Through questioning in a planned way, therapists guide clients to discover how their problems
are maintained and how problem-maintaining patterns may be modified. For example, when gathering evidence for and against a negative
automatic thought, it is better to ask the client about such evidence than tell them what you think the evidence is, because this provides
them with the experience of discovering it for themselves and becoming committed to altering their beliefs. This approach is referred to as

Socratic questioning after the Greek philosopher Socrates, who believed that all people have the wisdom to solve their own problems. The
role of the teacher is to ask questions that will elicit this wisdom and so guide students towards the good life.
Cognitive strategies
For cognitive strategies, follow this routine. First give the rationale for using cognitive strategies:
In our first meeting we both noticed that in many situations you have a tendency to look on the down side of things, to see the glass as half
empty rather than as half full. It also seemed to both of us that this way of thinking lowered your mood. One way to take control of your
mood and improve it is to start to question your tendency to look on the down side. We could begin by looking at that difficult situation you
mentioned a few minutes ago. Would you be prepared to do that?
Begin with an ABC analysis of a specific situation. Invite clients to state or write down a negative automatic thought or assumption (B)
that came to mind in response to a specific activating event (A) and ask them to rate the degree to which they believe in it on a scale from 1
to 10. Then they may be invited to state or write down what consequent emotion (C) this belief made them feel and rate its intensity on a
scale from 1 to 10. Once this has been done, the client is invited to use a specific cognitive strategy such as questioning the evidence for the
belief or doing an experiment to test the validity of the belief. When the strategy has been used, the client is invited to state or write down
an alternative balanced belief to replace the negative automatic thought or assumption. This alternative belief will have arisen from the
cognitive treatment strategy. The alternative belief should fit with the new evidence given by using the strategy. Once clients have stated or
written down the new belief, ask them to rate the degree to which they believe it on a scale from 1 to 10. Also invite them to state or write
down the emotion this new belief makes them feel and to rate its intensity on a scale from 1 to 10. Finally, invite them to note if there has
been an improvement in their emotional state. This final step offers proof for the effectiveness of the cognitive strategy in improving the
client's well-being.

Questioning the evidence
With this strategy, invite the client to list evidence for and against a negative automatic thought or assumption. Questioning the evidence involves inviting clients to distance themselves from the automatic thought or assumption and to accept that a problematic interpretation of an activating event is only one possible take on the situation, not true facts. Distancing sets the stage for stating the evidence for or against the negative automatic thought or assumption. Here are some questions to aid this process:
• In this situation you had the following thought.... This is just one take on or view of the situation. What evidence can you give me that this interpretation of the situation is accurate?
• Can you think of anything that might not fit with that take on the situation?
• Is there another possible interpretation of the situation that is more helpful to you?
• Can you think of any evidence that supports this more helpful take on the situation?
• If your negative take on the situation is supported by the evidence, are things as bad as you have made them out to be – a real catastrophe - or just a temporary nuisance?
• If you cannot decide whether there is more evidence for an optimistic or pessimistic interpretation of the situation, which interpretation is most useful to you in terms of being happy and achieving your goals?
• Having questioned the evidence for your negative belief and found that it was not fully supported, what is your new and more balanced belief?
• On a scale of 1 to 10, how strongly do you believe this?
• What emotion do you feel right now, and how would you rate this emotion on a scale from 1 to 10?
• Is this rating higher or lower than the rating you gave before you questioned the evidence for your first take on this situation?
• Has questioning the evidence led to an improvement in how you feel right now?

A thought record that is specially designed for this technique is contained in Table 3.4. In the first three columns, the antecedents,
beliefs and consequences associated with specific events that led to significant changes in the client's emotional state are listed. In the next
two columns, evidence for and against the problematic automatic thoughts is given. In the sixth column, an alternative, more balanced
interpretation of the situation is recorded. Finally, the last column is used to record information about emotional and cognitive changes
arising from questioning the evidence for the negative belief. This thought record can be used within therapy sessions to provide focus for
questioning the evidence, and also as the basis for a homework assignment. Initially clients are invited to use the first three columns to
learn how to identify activating events and consequent mood changes and to "catch" automatic thoughts and beliefs. Later, when skill at
pinpointing mood-changing events and thought catching have been refined, clients can be invited to fill in the last three columns, that is, to
use questioning the evidence in their day-to-day lives as a coping strategy.
There are a number of common difficulties with this therapeutic strategy. Some clients have difficulty distinguishing thoughts from
feelings. One way around this is to list a series of hypothetical situations and ask them to say what they would think and feel in each.
Then, give feedback on whether they are correctly labelling thoughts and feelings for each of their responses. For clients who have difficulty
identifying automatic thoughts, use the guidelines for thought catching presented earlier.
Behavioural experiments
Invite clients to set up an experiment that tests the validity of a negative automatic thought, assumption or core belief. For example, to test
the belief "I can't do anything right," clients may be invited to successfully complete one or more simple tasks inside or outside the therapy
sessions. These might include reading a passage from a book, writing a three-item shopping list, or telling the story of how their best friend
once did something good for them. By completing these tasks, clients have proved that they can do at least one or two things right. In
setting up experiments there are a number of critical preparatory tasks. First, grade the size of the challenge in the experiments, start small
and gradually work up towards more challenging experiments. Second, set specific times and places for experiments. Third, help the client


design the experiment to test out whether a particular belief is true or false and write down the possible outcomes or predictions. Fourth,
invite the client to anticipate possible problems in doing the experiment and collaborate on developing a list of strategies to overcome
possible problems or setbacks. Fifth, ask the client to write down the outcome of the experiment and whether it supported their negative or
positive predictions.
Table 3.4 Thought record for learning how to challenge automatic thoughts
Activating situation
When? Where? Who
was there? What
happened?
Beliefs What
negative automatic
thoughts went
through your mind?
How much did you
believe them 1-
10? What cognitive
distortions did you
make? Circle the hot
thought.
Consequences What
emotions did you
feel? How strong
were they 1-10?
How did you behave?
How did your body
react? What were
the reactions of
others?
What cognitive
coping strategy did
you use? Questioned
evidence for negative
belief Did an
experiment Gave up
safety behaviour Did
a survey Challenged
distortion Thought
in shades of grey Did
re-attribution Did a
cost-benefit analysis
Focused on positive
Was kind to myself
Used less extreme
language
What behavioural
coping strategy
did you use? Used
distraction Used
time-out Used
relaxation skills Did
physical activity
Had a pleasant event
Asked for support
Behaved assertively
Practised worrying
Used systematic
problem solving Used
systematic decision
making Faced graded
challenges Rewarded
self for coping
What was the
outcome? What
emotions did
you feel? How
strong were they
1-10? How did
you behave?
How did your
body react?
What were the
reactions of
others?

Safety behaviour experiments
Safety behaviour experiments are particularly appropriate as part of the treatment of certain anxiety disorders. Where anxious clients
use anxiety-maintaining safety behaviours to cope, first invite them to identify the safety behaviours used in threatening situations. For
social phobia, safety behaviours include avoiding eye contact to avoid seeing negative feedback from others, gripping objects tightly to
reduce nervous shaking, and taking deep breaths to stay calm. For panic attacks, safety behaviours include reducing physical activity to
prevent a feared heart attack, leaning on objects to prevent falling over, and suppressing worry to avoid losing control of one's mind. For
hypochondriasis, frequent medical consultations and personal health checks to get health information are common safety behaviours.
Once safety behaviours have been identified, invite clients to do an experiment in which they give up using safety behaviours and notice
the impact of this on their anxiety levels. Giving up safety behaviours usually provides evidence that the feared consequence clients were
avoiding with the safety behaviour does not occur. This weakens their anxious beliefs.
Belief surveys
Invite clients to ask a number of friends about the degree to which they believe in one of their negative automatic thoughts, assumptions
or beliefs. Their responses should be written down verbatim and these "survey results" are brought into therapy to explore their impact on
the degree to which clients still believe their negative automatic thoughts, assumptions or beliefs; the degree to which they believe more
balanced alternatives; and the consequent impact of these cognitive changes on their emotional well-being.
Challenging distortions
Invite clients to identify the cognitive distortion within one of their negative automatic thoughts, assumptions or beliefs, with reference to
the list in Table 3.1. Then invite them to list evidence to show the distortion is not always true. This provides a basis for rephrasing the belief
without the distortion, a process that usually leads to a more balanced type of belief.

Thinking in shades of grey
Invite clients to rephrase one of their negative automatic thoughts or assumptions using language that reflects thinking in shades of grey,
rather than black and white. Then, invite clients to list evidence to show that the statement involving shades of grey is probably more
consistent with the evidence than the black-and-white statement.
Re-attribution
Invite clients to rephrase a negative automatic thought that attributes a failure experience to internal, global, stable personal characteristics
as a statement that attributes failure to external, specific and transient factors. The other side of this strategy is inviting clients to rephrase
one of their negative automatic thoughts in which they attribute a success experience to external, specific and transient factors to internal,
global, stable personal characteristics.
Cost-benefit analysis
Invite clients to list the costs of holding a negative automatic thought, assumption or belief and the benefits of giving it up.
Focusing on the positive
Invite clients to replace negative automatic thoughts and assumptions that focus exclusively on problematic aspects of a situation with
alternatives that focus on positive features of the situation. List evidence to support the positive alternative.
Showing self-compassion
Invite clients to rephrase negative automatic thoughts and assumptions that involve "should," "must," "always" and "never" statements in
the compassionate language they would use if talking to a close friend who was in difficulty. These new statements will include words such
as "may sometimes" or "might occasionally" rather than "should never" and "must always." Then, invite clients to list reasons why they
deserve the compassion of these kinder and more reasonable statements.

Using less extreme language
Invite clients to rephrase negative automatic thoughts, assumptions and beliefs in less extreme language and list the evidence to support
these more reasonable statements.
Pie chart analysis
Where clients hold beliefs that they are completely to blame or 100% responsible for some negative event, with high associated feelings of
guilt or shame, invite them to indicate on a pie chart the percentage of responsibility that each of the other people involved in the situation
had. Clients typically apportion less of the responsibility to themselves after this exercise, with associated lessening of guilt and shame. For
example, a victim of an accident at work who believed he was completely responsible for the damage to himself and another worker was
invited to show in the pie chart how responsible his co-worker, supervisor and employer were for the accident, This use of the pie chart
strategy changed his belief from being 100% to 40% responsible.
Core belief test
For this cognitive schema-change strategy, begin by using the downward arrow technique mentioned earlier, an example of which is given
in Figure 3.2, to identify a core belief about the self, others, the world or the future. Then invite clients within the session and later as
homework to write down a list of pieces of evidence that show that the core belief is not 100% true all the time in all situations.
Positive daily log
For this cognitive schema-change strategy, the therapist does not begin and end the strategy in the way outlined at the beginning of the
section, since the focus of this strategy is positive, not negative beliefs. Fortunately all people have both positive adaptive schemas as well as
negative maladaptive schemas. Adaptive schemas include core beliefs such as "I'm good," "I'm competent" or "I'm likeable." With the positive
daily log, the existence of adaptive schemas of positive beliefs about the self, others, the world and the future is first established through
Socratic questioning. Positive automatic thoughts that occur following success or receiving support from others provide evidence for the

existence of these positive schemas. After this discovery, clients are then invited to rate the degree to which they believe a specific positive
belief on a scale from 1 to 10. Also invite them to state or write down the emotion this new belief makes them feel and to rate its intensity
on a scale from 1 to 10. As homework, invite clients to keep a record of all positive events that happen each day that provide evidence for the
truth of the positive belief in their adaptive schemas. In other words, they are invited to catch themselves being good, successful, likeable or
competent as often as possible and immediately write down these events in their logbook. The positive daily log is then reviewed in therapy
and clients are invited once again to rate the degree to which they believe their positive belief on a scale from 1 to 10. Also invite them to state
or write down the emotion this new belief makes them feel and to rate its intensity on a scale from 1 to 10. Finally, invite them to note if there
has been an improvement in their emotional state. This final step offers proof for the effectiveness of the cognitive strategy in improving
their emotional well-being.
Behavioural strategies
For behavioural strategies, follow this routine. First give a rationale for the behavioural method:
In our first meeting we both noticed that in certain trigger situations you end up feeling anxious, sad or angry. One way to take control of your
mood and improve it is to try to set situations up that are less distressing. Another way is to learn to tolerate being in difficult situations by
using certain coping strategies. We could begin by looking at that difficult situation you mentioned a few minutes ago. Would you be prepared
to do that?
Invite clients to state or write down a specific activating event and the consequent emotion that followed it, and to rate the intensity of
this distressing emotion on a scale of 1 to 10. Once this has been done, the client is then invited to use a specific cognitive strategy such as
relaxation skills or distraction. When the strategy has been used, clients are invited to state or write down the emotion they feel and to rate


its intensity on a scale of 1 to 10. Finally, invite clients to note if there has been an improvement in their emotional state. This final step offers
proof for the effectiveness of the behavioural strategy in improving their well-being.
Distraction and thought stopping
Invite clients to identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then ask them to
temporarily focus on some other aspect of the situation, engage in a distracting activity or stop their negative automatic thoughts. Specific
techniques include concentrating attention on another task, such as singing a song; focusing on an external physical object such as a tree
waving in the wind; actively postponing rumination until later that day; saying "stop" loudly and banging a hand on a table or other surface;
snapping an elastic band worn on the wrist; or looking at a flash card with STOP written on it in large letters.
Time-out
Invite clients to identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then to temporarily
withdraw from the situation. During this period of time-out, relaxation, physical exercise or cognitive strategies may be used to reduce
emotional distress. Clients should re-enter the situation when they have calmed their distressing emotions. This is a particularly suitable
technique for anger management.
Relaxation
Invite clients to identify the activating events that lead to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods. Clients are encouraged to
practise relaxation skills and use them in these situations to reduce anxiety. A set of relaxation exercises is given in Table 3.5. Customised
relaxation recordings are a useful adjunct to direct instruction, but relaxation recordings without instruction are of little clinical value.
When coaching clients in relaxation, use a slow calming tone of voice and repetition of instructions as required. For a minority of clients,
relaxation exercises lead to increased tension. This may occur because the client is made aware of previously unnoticed body tension
through completing the exercises. Alternatively it may occur because focusing attention on somatic processes during the exercises induces

anxiety. In such instances, work on only one or two muscle groups at a time and keep the training periods very short. Also request regular
anxiety ratings, and when increases in anxiety occur distract clients by asking them to engage in the visualisation exercise described in Table
3.5. When relaxation skills have become well developed, clients may be coached in reducing the time required to relax by focusing on the
muscle groups one at a time, allowing them to relax without movement in time to their breathing, and the mental self-instruction to relax as
they exhale. After two weeks of homework practice, clients can progress to applied relaxation, where a rapid body scan of all muscle groups,
paired with breathing exercises and a mental self-instruction to relax is used as a relaxation coping strategy in day-to-day challenging
situations.
Table 3.5 Relaxation exercises
Relaxation Exercises
After a couple of weeks of daily practice, you will have
developed enough skill to use these exercises to get rid of
unwanted body tension.
• Set aside 20 minutes a day to do these relaxation exercises.
• Do them at the same time and in the same place every day.
• Before you begin, remove all distractions (by turning off bright lights, the radio, etc.) and loosen any tight clothes (like belts, ties or
shoes).
• Lie on a bed or recline in a comfortable chair with the eyes lightly closed.
• Before and after each exercise breathe in deeply and exhale slowly three times while saying the word "relax."

• Repeat each exercise twice.
Area
Hands
Arms
Shoulders
Legs
Exercise
Close your hands into fists. Then allow them to open slowly.Notice
the change from tension to relaxation in your hands and allow this
change to continue further and further still so the muscles of your
hands become more and more relaxed.
Bend your arms at the elbows and touch your shoulders with your
hands. Then allow them to return to the resting position. Notice the
change from tension to relaxation in your arms and allow this change
to continue further and further still so the muscles of your arms
become more and more relaxed.
Hunch your shoulders up to your ears. Then allow them to return to
the resting position. Notice the change from tension to relaxation in
your shoulders and allow this change to continue further and further
still so the muscles of your shoulders become more and more relaxed.
Point your toes downwards. Then allow them to return to the resting
position. Notice the change from tension to relaxation in the fronts
of your legs and allow this change to continue further and further
still so the muscles in the fronts of your legs become more and more
relaxed.
Point your toes upwards. Then allow them to return to the resting
position.

Notice the change from tension to relaxation in the backs of your
legs and allow this change to continue further and further still so the
muscles in the backs of your legs become more and more relaxed.
Stomach
Take a deep breath and hold it for 3 seconds, tensing the muscles in
your stomach as you do so. Then breathe out slowly. Notice the change
from tension to relaxation in your stomach muscles and allow this
change to continue further and further still so your stomach muscles
become more and more relaxed.
Area
Exercise
Face
Clench your teeth tightly together. Then relax. Notice the change from
tension to relaxation in your jaw and allow this change to continue
further and further still so the muscles in your jaw become more and
more relaxed.
Wrinkle your nose up. Then relax.
Notice the change from tension to relaxation in the muscles around
the front of your face and allow this change to continue further
and further still so the muscles of your face become more and more
relaxed.
Shut your eyes tightly. Then relax.
Notice the change from tension to relaxation in the muscles around
your eyes and allow this change to continue further and further still
so the muscles around your eyes become more and more relaxed.

All over
Now that you've done all your muscle exercises, check that all areas
of your body are as relaxed as can be. Think of your hands and allow
them to relax a little more.
Think of your arms and allow them to relax a little more.
Think of your shoulders and allow them to relax a little more.
Think of your legs and allow them to relax a little more.
Think of your stomach and allow it to relax a little more.
Think of your face and allow it to relax a little more.
Breathing
Breathe in ... one ... two ... three ... and out slowly ... one ... two ...
three ... four ... five ... six ... and againBreathe in ... one ... two ... three
... and out slowly ... one ... two ... three ... four ... five ... six ... and
again
Breathe in ... one ... two ... three ... and out slowly ... one ... two ...
three ... four ... five ... six
Visualising
Imagine you are lying on beautiful sandy beach and you feel the sun
warm your body. Make a picture in your mind of the golden sand and
the warm sun.
As the sun warms your body you feel more and more relaxed.
As the sun warms your body you feel more and more relaxed.

As the sun warms your body you feel more and more relaxed.
The sky is a clear, clear blue. Above you, you can see a small white
cloud drifting away into the distance.
As it drifts away you feel more and more relaxed.
It is drifting away and you feel more and more relaxed.
It is drifting away and you feel more and more relaxed.
As the sun warms your body you feel more and more relaxed.
As the cloud drifts away you feel more and more relaxed.
(Wait for 30 seconds.)
When you are ready, open your eyes ready to face the rest of the day
relaxed and calm.
Imagery
Imagery-based interventions can modify negative mood states. In imaginal systematic desensitisation, clients are invited to master
increasingly anxiety-provoking images of fearful situations through the use of relaxation and other coping strategies. For clients with post-
traumatic stress disorder, situational cues may elicit vivid images that are more prominent than automatic thoughts. Also, some clients with
a wide range of other psychological problems find that negative visual imagery rather than negative automatic thoughts are the main factor
determining their negative emotional states. Where imagery is the primary determinant of mood, clients may be invited to relax using the
skills described in the previous section. Then invite clients to bring to mind an agreed distressing image. Next, ask the client to imagine

the "movie" of the image progressing and having a positive rather than a negative outcome. The process is repeated with each negative
image until cues that once called the negative image to mind now call the modified image to mind. This positive outcome is thus "invented"
collaboratively by the therapist and client.
Physical activity
Clients may be invited to use regularly scheduled periods of 30-90 minutes of daily physical activity to activate them if lethargic and
depressed, or to calm them down if anxious or angry. Physical activity may also be used as a coping strategy in specific situations. Invite
clients to identify activating events that lead to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then to engage in physical activity
following these activating events to enhance their emotional state.
Pleasant event scheduling
Clients may be invited to use regularly scheduled pleasant events to activate them if lethargic and depressed or to calm them down if anxious
or angry. First, construct a grid with the hours of the day from rising (e.g. 7.00 a.m.) until retiring (e.g. 12.00 a.m.) down the left side of the
page, and the days of the week across the top. Second, fill all routine obligations into this grid. Third, invite the client to list pleasant events
on a separate sheet and then fill these in the vacant slots in the grid. Pleasant events can include things like breathing clean air, walking in
the park, playing football with one's children or reading the paper. Make sure that there are at least seven pleasant events in each day (or one
for every two waking hours).
Worry practice
Where clients are concerned that their worrying is out of control, invite them to engage in daily planned periods of worrying to gain control
over the worry process.
Graded challenges
Invite clients to construct hierarchies of graded challenges. For anxiety disorders, these hierarchies will include increasingly feared


situations. For anger control problems, increasingly provocative situations should be included in these hierarchies. For depression, tasks
requiring increasing effort may be used. Arrange opportunities in therapy and as homework for clients to master challenges within their
hierarchies, one at a time starting with the least challenging, while using various coping strategies to deal with distress or challenge of each
step of the hierarchy.
Self-reward
Invite clients to use self-praise and tangible rewards (personal treats) for using coping strategies to deal effectively with activating events
and negative automatic thoughts.
Communication skills
Activating events may be modified through clear communication. Communication skills include listening and speaking. Through
modelling, rehearsal and shaping successive approximations to good performance, coach clients to listen without judging. Invite them to
put their own opinions and emotions on hold; to summarise what they have heard the other person say; and to check that their summary
was accurate before replying. When coaching clients in speaking skills, ask them to decide on the points they want to make first. Then
through modelling, rehearsal and shaping, coach them to organise their points logically, say them clearly using "I-statements," and check
that they have been understood. Coach clients to make their points without attacking, blaming, sulking or mind-reading.
Support-seeking
Support-seeking is a specific communication skill. Through modelling, rehearsal and shaping successive approximations to good
performance, coach clients to ask friends or family members for support to enhance their emotional state following challenging situations
that have led to negative automatic thoughts and negative mood states.

Assertiveness
Assertiveness is a particular communication skill. Through modelling, rehearsal and shaping successive approximations to good performance, coach clients to ask people whose behaviour is distressing to them to change their behaviour using a statement format like this:
When you do X, I feel Y so I would prefer if you did Z. Thank you.
Clients should be coached to state their requests without attacking, blaming or sulking and if provoked, to mentally stand back, breathe deeply, relax and start again: “When you do X.”
Problem solving
Problem solving may be used to modify activating events. Through modelling, rehearsal and shaping successive approximations to good performance, invite clients to first break big vague problems into many smaller specific problems to be tackled one at a time. Second, define each of these in solvable terms. Third, focus on solving the specific problem at hand, not attacking the person or people involved in the problem. Fourth, generate many possible solutions to the problem in hand. Fifth, when all solutions are generated, examine the pros and cons of each, and select the best. Sixth, implement this solution, review progress and modify the solution if it's not working. Finally, repeat this sequence as often as is necessary to solve the problem and celebrate success.
Decision making
Sometimes the principal activating event leading to negative automatic thoughts and a distressed mood state is a dilemma involving two possible courses of action. Where clients face a dilemma about two courses of action and this is causing significant emotional distress, invite them to write down the pros and cons of each course of action and base their decision on the balance of pros and cons.

Coping strategies
Most of the therapeutic strategies listed earlier can by used by clients in their day-to-day lives as coping strategies. Lists of these coping
strategies are given in Tables 3.6 and 3.7. A self-monitoring form on which clients can do an ABC analysis of problem situations and then
indicate which coping strategies they used and the impact of using these on their cognitive and emotional state is given in Table 3.8. For
recurring challenging situations, clients may be invited to write their own coping cards. The activating situation and/or negative automatic
thought is written on one side a preferred effective coping strategy for dealing with the challenging situation or negative automatic thought
is written on the other side. When facing these situations, cards are read and the coping strategies on them are used.
Disengagement
In the later sessions of a course of CBT the main tasks are to fade out the frequency of sessions, help clients understand the change process
and facilitate the development of relapse management plans (Prochaska et al., 1995). The interval between sessions is increased as the end
of therapy is reached, since this offers clients greater time periods within which to independently manage their own symptoms. This is an
approximation to complete independent symptom management, which will follow when disengagement is complete.
The degree to which goals are being met is reviewed regularly in CBT, but towards the end of the session contract (e.g. 6-10 sessions),
conduct a thorough goal attainment review using interview and psychometric assessment procedures. Then, review the CBT formulation
of the problem constructed in the early sessions and collaboratively explore how specific cognitive and behavioural strategies used during
therapy led to positive changes in the client's thinking style, behavioural routines, and emotional state. Where limited progress was made,
factors contributing to this may be explored.
In relapse management planning, clients are helped to forecast the types of stressful situations in which relapses may occur; their probable
negative reactions to relapses; and the ways in which they can use the lessons learned in therapy to cope with these relapses in a productive


way. Often relapses are triggered by similar factors to those that precipitated the original problem or by a build-up of stressful life events.
Once events that might precipitate a relapse have been identified, the negative automatic thoughts and consequent problematic emotional
and behavioural reactions through which these events will be translated into a full-blown relapse are considered. A relapse management
plan is then collaboratively developed. This will typically include constructing a CBT formulation and then using similar CBT strategies as
were used in therapy to manage the potential relapse. One part of this relapse prevention process may involve holding weekly self-therapy
sessions in which the client sets aside time to "meet with themselves" and use the CBT session structure to check how they are, set an agenda,
review homework, work through the agenda and set themselves homework for the next week. Where feasible, therapists can offer periodic
follow-up relapse prevention or management sessions.
Table 3.6 CBT cognitive coping strategies
For all cognitive strategies follow this routine.
Before using the strategy
State or write down a negative automatic thought or assumption and rate the degree to which you believe in it on a scale from 1 to 10.
State or write down what emotion this belief makes you feel and rate its intensity on a scale of 1 to 10.
Then use the specific strategy.
After using the strategy
State or write down an alternative balanced belief arising from using the strategy and that fits with the new evidence given by using the
strategy, and rate the degree to which you believe it on a scale of 1 to 10.
State or write down what emotion this new belief makes you feel and rate its intensity on a scale of 1 to 10.
Note if there has been an improvement in your emotional state.
Question the evidence for a negative belief. List the evidence for and against a negative automatic thought or assumption.


Do an experiment. Do an experiment which tests the validity of a negative automatic thought or assumption.
Do the experiment of giving up a safety behaviour. Identify the safety behaviour used in threatening situations. Then give it up and
notice the impact of this on how strongly you hold your anxious beliefs.
Conduct a survey. Ask a number of friends the degree to which they believe in one of your negative automatic thoughts or assumptions.
Identify distortions. Identify the cognitive distortion that one of your negative automatic thoughts or assumptions entails with
reference to the list in Table 3.1. List the evidence that shows that the distortion is not always true and restate the assumption without the
distortion.
Think in shades of grey. Rephrase one of your negative automatic thoughts or assumptions using language that reflects "shades of grey"
thinking rather than black-and-white thinking, and list the evidence to show the shades of grey statement is probably true.
Make a re-attribution. Rephrase one of your negative automatic thoughts in which you attribute a failure experience to internal, global,
stable personal characteristics to external, specific and transient factors. Rephrase one of your negative automatic thoughts in which you
attribute a success experience to external, specific, transient personal characteristics to internal, global and stable factors.
Do a cost-benefit analysis. List the costs of holding a negative automatic thought or assumption and the benefits of giving it up.
Focus on the positive. Replace negative automatic thoughts and assumptions that focus exclusively on the negative with alternatives
that focus on positive aspects of the situation and list evidence to support these alternatives.
Show self-compassion. Rephrase negative automatic thoughts and assumptions that involve "should" and "must," "always" and "never"
statements in the compassionate language you would use if talking to a close friend who was in difficulty. These new statements will
include words such as "may sometimes." List reasons why you deserve the compassion entailed by these kinder and more reasonable
statements.
Use less extreme language. Rephrase negative automatic thoughts and assumptions in less extreme language and list the evidence that
supports these more reasonable statements.
Table 3.7 CBT behavioural coping strategies

Behavioural strategies
For all behavioural strategies follow this routine.
Before using the strategy
State or write down the activating event and what emotion you feel and rate its intensity on a scale of 1 to 10.
Then use the specific strategy.
After using the strategy
State or write down what emotion you feel and rate its intensity on a scale of 1 to 10.
Note if there has been an improvement in your emotional state.
Use temporary distraction or thought stopping. Identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and
distressing moods, and then temporarily focus on some other aspect of the situation, use thought stopping, or engage in a distracting
activity.
Take time out. Identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods. Then take a little
time-out to relax, breathe, question the evidence for your distressing beliefs and calm down. Do not re-enter the situation until you have
calmed your distressing emotion.
Use relaxation skills. Identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then
practice relaxation skills to reduce anxiety.
Do physical activity. Identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then engage
in physical activity to enhance your mood.
Schedule a pleasant event. Identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then
engage in a pleasant event to enhance your mood.
Ask for support. Identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then ask a close
friend or family member for support to enhance your mood.


Behave assertively. Identify the activating event that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then rehearse
and follow through on assertively asking the person whose behaviour is distressing to you to change their behaviour using a statement
format like this "When you do X, I feel Y so I would prefer if you did Z. Thank you."
Practice worrying. Identify the worry pattern leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods, and then engage in
planned periods of worry to gain control over the worry process.
Solve problems systematically. Identify the activating problem that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing moods,
and break this big vague problem into many smaller specific problems. Define each of these in solvable terms. Generate many possible
solutions. Examine the pros and cons of each, and select the best. Implement this solution, review progress and modify the solution if it is
not working. Repeat this sequence as often as is necessary and celebrate successes.
Make decisions systematically. Identify the activating dilemma that is leading to negative automatic thoughts and distressing mood.
Write down the pros and cons of each course of action in this dilemma and base your decision on the balance of pros and cons.
Face graded challenges. Organise situations that give rise to distressing emotions such as anxiety or anger into a hierarchy and arrange to
master these one at a time starting with the least challenging, while using various coping strategies to deal with distress.
Reward yourself for coping. Use intermittent self-praise and tangible rewards for using coping strategies to deal effectively with
activating events and negative automatic thoughts.
Table 3.8 Thought record for tracking the use of cognitive and behavioural coping strategies
Activating situation
When? Where? Who
was there? What
happened?
Beliefs What
negative automatic
thoughts went
through your mind?
How much did you
believe them 1-
Consequences What
emotions did you
feel? How strong
were they 1-10?
How did you behave?
How did your body
What cognitive
coping strategy did
you use? Questioned
evidence for negative
belief Did an
experiment Gave up
What behavioural
coping strategy
did you use? Used
distraction Used
time-out Used
relaxation skills Did
What was the
outcome? What
emotions did
you feel? How
strong were they
1-10? How did

10? What cognitive
distortions did you
make? Circle the hot
thought.
react? What were
the reactions of
others?
safety behaviour Did
a survey Challenged
distortion Thought
in shades of grey Did
re-attribution Did a
cost-benefit analysis
Focused on positive
Was kind to myself
Used less extreme
language
physical activity
Had a pleasant event
Asked for support
Behaved assertively
Practised worrying
Used systematic
problem solving Used
systematic decision
making Faced graded
challenges Rewarded
self for coping
you behave?
How did your
body react?
What were the
reactions of
others?

Summary
CBT assumes that problematic thoughts, feelings and behaviour patterns are learned through the same processes as normal thoughts,
feelings and behaviour. These learning processes include operant and classical conditioning, and various cognitive processes such as
modelling and identification. Therapy involves coaching clients to replace problematic habits with more adaptive ways of thinking, feeling,
behaving and interacting with others. CBT is an effective treatment for depression and anxiety disorders and is an effective component of
multimodal treatment programmes for bipolar disorder, positive psychotic symptoms, pain management, management of some illnesses,
and problems associated with some personality disorders. CBT is a collaborative process involving the therapist and client. In the assessment
and formulation stage of CBT, a contract for assessment is established, a problem list is drawn up and a formulation is constructed. The ABC
situational aspect of a CBT formulation details the way antecedent factors (A), intervening beliefs (B) and psychological consequences (C)
maintain the client's main difficulties. The syndromal aspect of a CBT formulation specifies the underlying schemas that render the client

vulnerable to their problems and the stressful life events that triggered the onset of the current episode of their psychological disorder. A
treatment contract is formed on the basis of a CBT formulation and this specifies the goals and duration of therapy. CBT sessions follow a set
format which includes orientation to the structure of the session, check-in, agenda setting, homework review, working through the agenda,
homework setting, summarising and feedback. Through Socratic questioning and guided discovery, therapists help clients to see how their
problems are maintained and how problem-maintaining patterns may be modified. CBT treatment programmes include cognitive and
behavioural therapeutic strategies. Cognitive strategies aim to modify problem-maintaining automatic thoughts, assumptions and core
beliefs (e.g. questioning the evidence for negative beliefs). Behavioural strategies aim to equip clients with skills to alter or cope better with
activating events or to engage in activities that have a direct and positive impact on emotional states and which are intrinsically reinforcing
(e.g. activity scheduling or relaxation skills training). In the final sessions of a CBT programme, the main tasks are to fade out the frequency
of sessions, help clients understand the change process and facilitate the development of relapse management plans.
Exercise
Work in pairs. Adopt roles of interviewer and interviewee and reverse roles when the interview is over. The interviewer should invite the
interviewee to describe a minor mood problem that he or she or had in the past week or two. Then, using the thought record in Table 3.4, do
an ABC problem analysis and question the evidence for the automatic thought.
Further reading for practitioners
Barlow, D. (2014). Clinical Handbook of Psychological Disorders. A Step-by-Step Treatment Manual (Fifth Edition). New York: Guilford.
Beck, J. (2011a). Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.


Beck, J. (2011b). Cognitive Therapy for Challenging Problems: What to Do When the Basics Don't Work. New York: Guilford.
Clark, D., & Fairburn, C. (1997). The Science and Practice of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hawton, K., Salkovskis, P., Kirk, J., & Clark, D. (1989). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Psychiatric Problems: A Practical Guide. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Assessment techniques

Mobilio, A., Hersen, M., & Bellack, A. (2002). Dictionary of Behavioural Assessment Techniques. New York: Percheron Press.

Further reading for clients

Benson, H., & Stuart, E. (1992). The Wellness Book: A Comprehensive Guide to Maintaining Health and Treating Stress Related Illness. New
York: Scribner.
Burns, D. (1999a). Feeling Good. The New Mood Therapy—Revised and Updated. New York: Avon.
Burns, D. (1999b). The Feeling Good Handbook—Revised. New York: Plume.
Butler, G., & Hope, T. (2007). Manage Your Mind (Second Edition). New York: Oxford University Press.
Davis, M., Eshelman, E., & McKay, M. (2008). The Relaxation and Stress Workbook (Sixth Edition). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Greenberger, D., & Padesky, C. (1995). Mind Over Mood: Changing How You Feel by Changing the Way You Think. New York: Guilford.
Madders, J. (1997). The Stress and Relaxation Handbook: A Practical Guide to Self-Help Techniques. London: Vermillion.
Prochaska, J., Norcross, J., & Di Clemente, C. (1995). Changing for Good. New York: Avon.


References
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA: Author.
Ayllon, T., & Azrin, N. (1968). The Token Economy. New York: Wiley.
Barlow, D. (2014). Clinical Handbook of Psychological Disorders. A Step-by-Step Treatment Manual (Fifth Edition). New York: Guilford.
Barlow, D., Allen, L., & Basden, S. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for panic disorders, phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder. In P.
Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 351-394). New York: Oxford University Press.
Beck, A. (1976). Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New York: International Universities Press.
Beck, A., & Steer, R. (1990). Beck Anxiety Inventory. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A., Steer, R., & Brown, G. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory-Second Edition (BDI-II). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, J. (2011a). Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.
Beck, J. (2011b). Cognitive Therapy for Challenging Problems: What to Do When the Basics Don't Work. New York: Guilford.
Burns, D. (1999a). Feeling Good. The New Mood Therapy-Revised and Updated. New York: Avon.
Burns, D. (1999b). The Feeling Good Handbook-Revised. New York: Plume.
Carr, A. (2009). What Works with Children, Adolescents and Adults? A Review of Research on the Effectiveness of Psychotherapy. London:
Routledge.
Clark, D., & Fairburn, C. (1997). The Science and Practice of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Costa, P., & McCrae, R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R and NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) Professional Manual.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.

De Silva, P., Rachman, S., & Seligman, M. (1977). Prepared phobias and obsessions: Therapeutic outcome. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
15, 65-77.
Eysenck, H. (1960). Behaviour Therapy and the Neuroses. Oxford: Pergamon.
Eysenck, H. (1979). The conditioning model of neurosis. The Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 2, 155-199.
Fordyce, W. (1976). Behavioural Methods for Chronic Pain and Illness. St Louis: Mosby.
Greenberger, D., & Padesky, C. (1995). Mind over Mood: Changing How You Feel by Changing the Way You Think. New York: Guilford.
Hawton, K., Salkovskis, P., Kirk, J., & Clark, D. (1989). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Psychiatric Problems: A Practical Guide. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Mowrer, O. (1960). Learning Theory and Behaviour. New York: Wiley.
Nathan, P., & Gorman, J. (2007), A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition). New York: Oxford University Press.
Padesky, C., & Greenberger, D. (1995). Clinician's Guide to Mind over Mood. New York: Guilford.
Prochaska, J., Norcross, J., & Di Clemente, C. (1995). Changing for Good. New York: Avon.
Rachman, S. (1997). The evolution of cognitive behaviour therapy. In D. Clark & C. Fairburn (Eds.), The Science and Practice of Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy (pp. 1-26). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Skinner, B. (1957). Verbal Behaviour. New York: Appleton Century & Crofts.
Teasdale, J. (1997). The relationship between cognition and emotion. The mind-in-place in mood disorders. In D. Clark & C. Fairburn
(Eds.), The Science and Practice of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (pp. 67-94). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ullman, L., & Krasner, L. (1965). Case Studies in Behaviour Modification. New York: Hold Rinehart and Winston.
Watson, J. (1924). Behaviourism. Chicago: The People's Institute.
Williams, J., Watts, F., McLeod, C., & Matthews, A. (1997). Cognitive Psychology and Emotional Disorders (Second Edition). Chichester:
Wiley.


Wolpe, J. (1958). Psychotherapy by Reciprocal Inhibition. Stanford CA: Stanford University Press.
World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic
Guidelines. Geneva: Author.
Young, J. (2003). Young Schema Questionnaire: Long Form. Available at http://www.schematherapy.com/id53.htm
Young, J., Klosko, J., & Weishaar, M. (2003). Schema Therapy: A Practitioner's Guide. New York: Guilford.


Chapter 4 Psychodynamic therapy
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-4
Brief psychodynamic therapy (BPT) is an evidence-based approach to clinical practice, which falls within the psychoanalytic tradition (Crits-
Cristoph & Barber, 1991; Gustafson, 1986; Lambert, 2013; Leichsenring et al., 2014; Leichsenring & Klein, 2014; PDM Taskforce, 2006;
Ursano et al., 2004; Ursano & Ursano, 2009). BPT originated with the work of Sigmund Freud, who reported a number of cases of brief
therapy based on dynamic principles. In the UK, Balint (Balint et al., 1972) and Malan (1995) have been central figures in this tradition. In
the US, important contributors to BPT have been made by Sifneos (1987), Davanloo (1980), Mann (1973), Strupp (Strupp & Binder, 1984),
Luborsky (1984) and Horowitz (Horowitz et al., 1984). In this chapter the focus will be on the approach to BPT originated by David Malan
(1995) at the Tavistock Clinic in the UK and developed by Leigh McCullough at Harvard University in the US (McCullough et al., 2003;
McCullough-Vaillant, 1997).
Case vignette
Michael, a 40-year-old man, came to therapy because of anxiety, depression and chest pains for which no physical basis could be found.

Because of his work as a teacher in a local school, and voluntary work as a coach and committee member at a local football club, he was well
respected in his local community. Happily married with three children, Michael had many friends and was an excellent footballer and coach.
His family and developmental history were within normal limits, with no family history of psychological problems, no major early life
stresses, no major family lifecycle problems and no educational or occupational difficulties. Throughout his school and college career,
Michael's academic, social and sporting performances were consistently excellent. He was team captain on many of his school teams and
went on to play football for his county. When he was 22, he competed in regional football finals, about which his father was particularly
proud. He came from a well-respected and stable family. His retired grandfather was formerly a chief fire office for the county, and his father
worked until his retirement five years previously as a school principal at the school where Michael was first a pupil, then a teacher and more
recently a vice principal. Both his father and grandfather were highly regarded in the community. Great sportsmen, both played on their
county football teams and had been coaches and referees. Both were devoted to their families. It was puzzling that a man with such a normal
background should present for assessment of psychological problems. In the two assessment sessions, Michael described three episodes of
chest pain. The first occurred in his home office at 6.30 p.m. on a Friday. It had been a busy day during which he finished a major proposal for
changes at the school. The ideas for change were drafted by the new school principal but would likely meet some resistance from school staff.
Michael had been working for a month on a presentation of the ideas to the school staff. In an informal meeting with the principal, he
outlined the presentation. The principal praised him highly and asked him to redraft the presentation in preparation for a school staff
meeting on Monday at 9 a.m. – a very demanding task. Michael said he was more than willing to undertake this. Michael saw his GP that
evening and on his advice rested for the weekend and Monday, and rescheduled the presentation for the following Thursday. The second
episode of chest pain occurred about a month later in his car with his wife and children on a Sunday afternoon, at about 5.00 p.m. on the way
home from a visit to his wife's parents. It had been a pleasant visit during which his wife's parents invited them to Christmas dinner, and
despite their polite protests would not take no for an answer. Michael and his wife had made plans to spend Christmas day in their new house
that year rather than with either of their parents. Michael was disappointed about this change in plan, but so as not to offend his in-laws, said

he would be delighted to have Christmas dinner with them. When he got the chest pain, his wife drove him home and he spent the evening
and the next day resting. He mentioned to his wife that he hoped this would not occur when he was driving home from her parents' house
on Christmas day. The third episode of chest pain occurred 6 weeks later on a Wednesday evening at about 10.00 p.m., in the bar of his
football club after a committee meeting. One issue that concerned him during the committee meeting had been the request by the chairman
that some of the more long-standing members of the committee should step down to leave room for new people to join. Michael said in the
meeting that he supported the chairman, because in principle he thought it was his duty to support the chair. However, Michael had been on
the committee for years, enjoyed the role, and hoped one day to be chairman himself. When he got the chest pains later that evening, his
close friends from the committee tended to him and drove him home, rather than ordering him a taxi. He took that as an indication of their
support for him and a token of the depth of their friendship. After all three episodes, Michael visited his GP who could identify no
physiological cause for the "attacks" and so after the third episode, referred Michael to a cardiologist. The cardiologist too could find no
physical basis for the complaints and advised a psychological consultation, suggesting that the episodes were stress-related. Over the three
months from the first episode to the consultation with the cardiologist, Michael had noticed his mood becoming more depressed and
irritable. This led to conflict with other school staff, about which he felt uncomfortable, particularly in light of his recent promotion to vice
principal. It also led to conflict with his children at home. Michael worried a great deal more than he used to about his health, his mortality,
his popularity at the football club, making renovations to his new house, and the amount of time he spent at work. A preliminary BPT
formulation following the model set out in Figure 4.1 was made after two assessment sessions and Michael was judged to be suitable for BPT
using the criteria set out in Table 4.1. Subsequently he completed 10 sessions of BPT, during which the chest pains no longer recurred.
However, his anxiety and depression initially intensified and then later abated during the course of treatment. The BPT focused
predominantly on restructuring defences and then restructuring affect, but not self-other restructuring - strategies summarised in Table
4.2. Details of the therapy are given later.


Triangles of conflict and person
The model of psychodynamic practice described in this chapter and outlined in Figure 4.1 may be useful for work with clients referred for
psychological therapy for difficulties with anxiety, depression, somatic complaints and interpersonal problems. The model includes Ezriel's
(1952) triangle of conflict and Menninger's (1958) triangle of person. These triangles were linked by Malan (1995) and presented as the
theoretical basis for psychodynamic treatment planning by McCullough-Vaillant (1997). Within this formulation model, difficulties with
which clients present arise because they have used dysfunctional psychological defence mechanisms (D) to manage anxiety and other
inhibitory affects (A) about the expression of potentially adaptive but unacceptable feelings and impulses (F). In the case example, Michael
appeared to be using the defence of reaction formation (D) (being very agreeable, when in fact he was very angry), to manage anxiety (A)
about expressing his unacknowledged feeling of anger towards authority figures (F) including his school principal, his father-in law, and the
football club chairman. These D-A-F patterns are typically long-standing and have begun in childhood through interactions with parents
and other past persons (P). They are maintained by interactions with significant people in the client's current life situation (C) and are re-
enacted as transference with the therapist (T) during the course of therapy, a context within which they can be explored and understood. In
Michael's case, his pattern of using reaction formation as a defence began in his family of origin, where he often agreed, in a very good-
humoured way, to take on academic, sporting and social challenges suggested by his father, rather than assert his wish not to, because to be
assertive or aggressive would make him feel ashamed. The use of reaction formation won him his father's (P) expression of pride in his
achievement, and in adult life the approval of his school principal, father-in-law and committee chairman (C). These reactions of significant
people in his current adult life maintained his use of the defence of reaction formation. In therapy, Michael also used this defence by
attempting to be overly cooperative and refusing to acknowledge ambivalent feelings about the therapist (T) in situations where he clearly
had such feelings. These transference reactions were explored in therapy. The prototypical D-A-F pattern is referred to as the triangle of


conflict, because of the dynamic conflict between the hidden feeling (F) and the anxiety (A) about its expression. The T-C-P triangle is
referred to as the triangle of person, because it represents the three categories of people with whom the triangle of conflict may potentially
occur. Each triangle stands on its apex, and in each, the apex represents an aspect that is to be uncovered in therapy. So with the triangle of
conflict, ultimately it is the hidden feeling that is to be uncovered and experienced. With the triangle of person, uncovering ultimately
focuses on the relationship with the parents or caregivers.
Ezriel's Triangle of Conflict
Defences
Behaviour patterns, thoughts
states to manage conflict between
adaptive feelings and anxiety
D
Anxiety
Guilt and shame due to conflict
between adaptive feelings and
internal or societal inhibitions
A
F
Adaptive Feelings
Adaptive forms of anger,
sexual desire, attachment,
positive feelings about the
self, joy, excitement, interest,
and grief
Menninger's Triangle of Person
Current Persons
Partner, spouse, children, friends,
colleagues, boss, authority
figures
C
Therapist
T
P
Past Persons
Parents, carers, teachers,
siblings, significant relations,
close childhood friends
These D-A-F patterns trigger with past persons (P), are maintained by interactions with current persons (C), and are re-enacted as transference with the therapist (T).

Figure 4.1 Triangles of conflict and person
Note: Based on Ezriel. H. (1952). Notes on psychoanalytic group therapy: II. Interpretation, Research Psychiatry, 15, 199. Menninger, K. (1958). Theory
of Psychoanalytic Technique. London: Imago. Malan, D. (1995). Individual Psychotherapy and the Science of Psychodynamics. London: Arnold. McCullough-
Vaillant, L. (1997). Changing Character: Short-Term Anxiety Regulating Psychotherapy for Restructuring Defences, Affects and Attachments. New York: Basic
Books.
Table 4.1 Suitability criteria for brief psychodynamic therapy
Sufficient distress to be motivated
Capacity to form a therapeutic alliance - history of at least one
good relationship
Psychologically minded - responds to trial interpretation
Capacity to tolerate strong affect without acting impulsively
Courage to explore more adaptive ways of managing conflict
Stable life situation and some social support
Clear focus for therapy stated as triangles of defence and person
GAF score above 50
To determine GAF score, enquire about these areas in the past six months: Symptoms (depression, anxiety, anger control, somatic
complaints, etc.) Social functioning (family, intimate relationships, peer relationships in leisure activities) Educational or occupational
functioning (at college or work)
100
No symptoms and superior social and occupational/educational
functioning

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
Minimal symptoms (e.g. exam anxiety or occasional family conflict)
and good social and occupational/educational functioning
Transient symptoms (e.g. concentration difficulties after a family
argument) leading to slight impairment in social or occupational/
educational functioning (e.g. temporary under-functioning at work
or school)
Mild symptoms (e.g. low mood and insomnia) or mild impairment
in social or occupational/educational functioning (e.g. truancy, minor
thefts), but can make and maintain relationships
Moderate symptoms (e.g. panic attacks, flat affect and circumstantial
speech) or moderate impairment in social and occupational/
educational functioning (e.g. few friends, conflict with people at work
or school)
Serious symptoms (e.g. suicidal ideation, severe obsessional
rituals, frequent shoplifting) or serious impairment in social or
occupational/educational functioning (e.g. no friends, unable to keep
a job)
Some impairment in reality testing or communication (e.g. speech at
time illogical, obscure or irrelevant) or major impairment in several
areas such as work, school, family, judgement, thinking, mood (e.g.
depressed man who avoids friends, neglects family and is unable to
work)
Behaviour is considerably influenced by delusions or hallucinations

20
10
or shows serious impairment in communication or judgement or
inability to function in almost all areas
Some danger of hurting self or others or occasionally fails to maintain
minimal personal hygiene or gross impairment in communication
Persistent danger of severely hurting self or others or persistent
inability to maintain minimal personal hygiene or serious suicidal act
with clear expectation of death.
Note: Based on McCullough, L., Kuhn, N., Andrews, S., Kaplan, A., Wolf, J., & Hurley, C. (2003). Treating Affect Phobia: A Manual for Short-Term Dynamic
Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford; Aveline, M. (1995). How I assess for focal therapy. In C. Mace (Ed.), The Art and Science of Assessment in Psychotherapy (pp. 137-
154). London: Routledge; Piper, W., Joyce, A., McCallum, M., Azim, H. & Ogrodniczuk, J. (2002). Interpretive and Supportive Psychotherapies. Matching Therapy and
Personality. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; and Luborsky, L. (1962). Clinicians' judgements of mental health. Archives of General Psychiatry,
7,407-417.
Table 4.2 Therapeutic goals, strategies and techniques in brief psychodynamic psychotherapy
Goals
Defence restructuring
Strategies
Defence recognition
Techniques
Pointing out defences against forbidden adaptive
feelings
Validating defences
Pointing out existing exceptions to using defences


Defence relinquishing
Repeating pointing out defences until they are
routinely recognised
Identifying costs and benefits and secondary gains
of defences
Tracing origins of defences and how they are now
maintained
Grieving losses due to defences
Repeating relinquishing interventions to increase
motivation to give up defences
Affect restructuring
Affect experiencing
Facilitating gradual exposure to the feared
adaptive feelings and impulses
Preventing use of old defences
Affect expression
Repeating exposure and defence prevention until
fear of forbidden feelings is desensitised
Exploring new ways to express feared adaptive
feelings in vivo
Exploring ways to tolerate interpersonal conflict in
vivo
Self-other restructuring
Self- restructuring
Repeating affect expression until new ways of
expressing feared affect flow naturally
Desensitisation to positive feelings towards the
self

Facilitating viewing the self from the perspective
of others
Integrating positive and negative feelings towards
the self
Facilitating self-parenting
Repeating self-restructuring interventions until
positive self-feelings are no longer avoided and
self-esteem improves
Other restructuring
Desensitisation to nurturant feelings from others
Empathy skills training to facilitate accurate and
compassionate perception of others
Integrating positive and negative views of others
Identifying and restructuring "addictive"
attachments
Repeating other-restructuring interventions until
adaptive feelings within relationships are no
longer avoided
Note: Based on McCullough-Vaillant, L. (1997). Changing Character: Short-Term Anxiety Regulating Psychotherapy for Restructuring Defences, Affects and
Attachments. New York: Basic Books; and McCullough, L., Kuhn, N., Andrews, S., Kaplan, A., Wolf, J., & Hurley, C. (2003). Treating Affect Phobia: A Manual for Short-
Term Dynamic Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford.
A final point concerning the formulation deserving mention is the role of precipitating stresses. Often acute symptoms develop in the wake
of increased personal demands, stresses or life changes. Michael's chest pains occurred in the wake of two major life changes. In the six-

month period before the pains, he had been promoted to vice principal of the school and had moved into a house that was somewhat beyond
his means. These two (self-created) demands gave rise to many opportunities for Michael to use his habitual defence mechanisms in ways
that involved high personal costs, particularly denying his own need for fairness.
Core conflictual relationship theme method
There are a variety of other BPT formulation models other than that presented in Figure 4.1. Of these, the Core Conflictual Relationship
Theme (CCRT) method deserves mention because of its significant impact on research in the field of BPT (Book, 1998). With the CCRT
method, the therapist extracts three key elements from the client's accounts of a series of problematic relationship episodes in which the
presenting problem occurred: (1) the client's wish (W), (2) the client's anticipated response of the other person (imagined response from
the other or RO) and (3) the client's response in the situation (actual response of self or RS). So in the case of Michael, in the vignette that
opened this chapter, in the three episodes his wish (W) was to speak out in anger for being so unfairly treated. His imagined response of the
other (RO) was violent or embarrassing retaliation against him. His actual response (RS) was to act in an overly cooperative way. When this
formulation model is compared with the triangle of conflict of the formulation model in Figure 4.1, there are many similarities. The wish
(W) and adaptive feeling (F) are both referring to the same phenomenon. The anticipated or imagined response of others (RO) is very similar
to anxiety (A) in the triangle of conflict. The actual response of the client (RS) and the defence (D) in the triangle of conflict seem to refer to
the same thing. In this chapter, the focus will be exclusively on the formulation model presented in Figure 4.1, but it is important to note that
this is not the only model informing evidence-based practice of BPT.
Aims of BPT
The goal of BPT is to help clients resolve their presenting problems by targeting specific elements in their problem formulations:

• Defence restructuring
• Affect restructuring
• Self-other restructuring.
The first aim of brief psychodynamic psychotherapy, defence restructuring, has two parts: defence recognition and defence relinquishing.
Defence restructuring aims to help clients recognise how they use defences to manage anxiety about having and expressing forbidden
feelings about people in the T-C-P triangle. This is challenging because clients are often not fully conscious of their maladaptive patterns
of using defences in response to anxiety about having strong unacceptable feelings and the replication of such maladaptive patterns
across T, C and P contexts. They also resist becoming conscious of the patterns and their replication across contexts because this involves
acknowledging that they do in fact have strong forbidden feelings and impulses such as aggression, sexual desire, attachment, sadness and
so forth. Defence relinquishing aims to increase clients' motivation to give up the use of defences. Giving up or reducing the use of defences
in response to anxiety is difficult, as clients must tolerate the inhibitory anxiety about having and expressing hidden feelings. Before coming
to therapy, clients have usually habitually resisted accepting these affective experiences because they have learned in childhood that to
have these feelings is to risk rejection or punishment from their parents and those that provide them with safety and security. Michael had
learned the lesson, "if I am angry, I'm bad and will be abandoned." Other common childhood lessons that lead to the inhibition of activating
emotions are, "sex is dirty, so don't be rude or you will be punished," "don't be a show-off or no-one will like you," "big boys are not clingy,
so stand on your own two feet," "don't be a cry-baby or you'll be rejected," "always be very, very careful or you will die" and so forth. These
messages are often not only unconscious but sometimes preverbally encoded, making the development of insight into defences even more
challenging.
The second goal of psychodynamic psychotherapy, affect restructuring, also has two parts: affect experiencing and affect expression.
Affect experiencing aims to help clients fully experience and accept their forbidden adaptive feelings without anxiety. Affect expression
aims to find socially acceptable ways to express previously "forbidden" feelings. For Michael, the implicit therapeutic goal was for him
to permit himself to experience his anger towards authority figures and express it assertively. McCullough conceptualises this process of

accepting forbidden feelings without anxiety and without avoiding anxiety through using defence mechanisms as becoming desensitised
to an affect phobia, a topic to which we will return in the next section. Accepting forbidden feelings is particularly challenging because it
involves letting go of the belief that having strong forbidden feelings and expressing these will compromise safety and security.
The third goal of psychodynamic psychotherapy, self-other restructuring, is to help clients develop a more tolerant attitude towards
themselves, a more accurate and compassionate view of others and a more secure style of engaging in self-other attachments. This involves
modifying the internalised models of self, others and relationships learned during childhood.
Dynamic conflict, affect phobia and desensitisation
McCullough et al. (2003) have reframed dynamic conflict as affect phobia. In dynamic conflict people repeatedly develop anxiety (pole A
of the triangle of conflict in Figure 4.1) when they experience the possible occurrence of a forbidden feeling such as anger or sexual desire
(pole F of the triangle of conflict in Figure 4.1) and so use a defence mechanism (pole D of the triangle of conflict in Figure 4.1) to manage
the anxiety and repress the hidden feeling. This is analogous to experiencing phobic anxiety (A) in response to a feared stimulus (F) and
responding with escape or avoidance (D). In Michael's case this involved experiencing anxiety (A) in response to the forbidden feeling of
anger towards authority (F) and responding with reaction formation (D), for example supporting the chairman who wanted him to leave the
football club committee that he loved. Each time this process occurs, the hidden feeling (F) and anxiety (A) become more strongly associated
through classical conditioning. Because the use of the defence mechanism (D) leads to a reduction in anxiety, the defence is negatively
reinforced, and is more likely to be used again.
Through this reframing of dynamic conflict, McCullough argues that in BPT, the role of the therapist is to desensitise the client to their
anxiety-provoking (A) forbidden feelings (F). In Michael's case he needed to be desensitised to his fear of assertively expressing his anger
to authority figures. Desensitisation is achieved by exposing clients gradually to increasingly stronger "doses" of forbidden feelings (F)
and helping them to tolerate the anxiety (A) associated with this process until it subsides, while at the same time preventing them from

using their habitual defence mechanisms (D) to escape from the anxiety-provoking situation. Thus, desensitisation in BPT involves gradual
exposure and response prevention. It is critical that the steps in this exposure process are finely graded and that clients master their anxiety
to each graded dose of the forbidden feeling. If clients escape from experiencing a particular dose of the forbidden feeling before they have
reduced the anxiety associated with it, they become more sensitised to it.
In BPT desensitisation involves helping clients bring forbidden feeling into consciousness, helping them tolerate and gradually reduce
the anxiety this provokes, and then repeating the process with an even more anxiety-provoking dose of exposure to the forbidden feeling.
During this cycle, the therapist helps the client keep their anxiety within manageable limits, a process often referred to as "containing" in
psychodynamic practice. This is typically done by asking, "what is the most painful/most frightening/hardest thing about these feelings?"
and then exploring these anxieties.
For example, in Michael's case he was invited to focus on how he felt at the meeting in the football club just before he supported the
chairman's proposal for long-standing members to step down from the committee. As he did so, he became aware of increasing distress
tinged with anger. When asked, "what is the hardest thing about these feelings?" he gradually identified his anger at the chairman for
suggesting he step down from the committee, a committee he someday wanted to chair. He also identified anxiety about expressing this
anger since he believed that to be a good man, he should support rather than oppose a leader, in this case, the chairman. It took some time for
his anxiety about this to subside because, for Michael, being angry at authority equated with being bad and being judged harshly or rejected
by others.
Later in therapy, Michael showed strong physiological signs of emotional arousal when the therapist informed him that he needed to
reschedule an appointment due to the emergence of an unforeseen event. Michael said that he completely understood, that the rescheduling
was not a problem and that he would be happy to go along with it. When this transference reaction was explored and the parallels between
Michael's reactions to the therapist (T) and the way Michael had reacted to his school principal, father-in-law and football club chairman in
his current life (C), and his father during his childhood (P), he showed a large increase in distress and anxiety. When asked what was the

hardest thing about these feelings, he identified his anger at the therapist for changing the arrangements and his anxiety about expressing
this anger because it would lead to the therapist either humiliating or abandoning him.
These two events are examples of steps in a desensitisation hierarchy for an affect phobia, with the discussion of a recent event (the
football club situation) being less anxiety-provoking than the here-and-now transference interpretation.
From the foregoing discussion, it is clear that clinically it is important to know what type of emotions are involved in typical BPT
formulations and what types of defence mechanisms are commonly used. These issues will be addressed in the next two sections.
Emotions
A list of some of the main emotions of concern in BPT is given in Table 4.3 (McCullough et al., 2003), divided into activating and inhibiting
categories. Activating emotions motivate us to engage in approach behaviour and inhibiting emotions motivate avoidance. On the triangle
of conflict in Figure 4.1, activating emotions occupy the lowest corner labelled F (for adaptive feelings) and inhibiting emotions occupy the
top right-hand corner labelled A (for anxiety). Activating emotions include anger, sexual desire, attachment and positive feelings towards
the self, joy, excitement and grief. Inhibitory emotions include anxiety, guilt and shame. Historically within the psychodynamic tradition,
because of Freud's hypotheses about their importance, there has been a strong focus on the activating emotions of sexual desire and anger.
However, in McCullough-Vaillant's (1997) practice the most common activating emotions underpinning core conflicts are anger, grief,
attachment and positive feelings towards the self.
All of these emotions have important functions listed in Table 4.3. They give us information about changes in our environment and
motivate us to adapt to these changes. For example, anger lets us know that we are under threat and motivates us to assert our needs and
protect ourselves against further boundary violations. Anxiety lets us know that we are in danger and may need to withdraw rather than
defend our boundaries.


Sometimes emotions lead to adaptive behaviour. For example, anger expressed as assertion is adaptive. On other occasions, emotions lead
to destructive behaviour; for example, anger expressed by violently attacking another physically or verbally. Similarly, inhibitory feelings
may be adaptive, where anxiety leads us to withdraw from dangerous situations, or maladaptive, where anxiety leads us to withdraw from
all spontaneous or adventurous activity.
During the course of development, in relationships with primary caregivers, we learn that emotions such as anxiety and shame signal
the importance of inhibiting the destructive expression of activating emotions such as aggression. Anxiety and shame occur when children
perceive that any expression of activating emotions is disapproved of by the caregiver, or fantasises that their safety or security will be
threatened if they express activating emotions such as aggression, sexual desire or joy. Defence mechanisms are used to manage the anxiety
associated with the fears about expressing activating emotions, as well as allowing symbolic expression of the feeling.
Unfortunately, many defence mechanisms are fairly unsophisticated and lead not only to the exclusion of anxiety from consciousness, but
to all vestiges of the activating emotion being excluded from consciousness as well. In such situations, not only is the destructive expression
of the activating emotion inhibited, but also the adaptive expression of the activating emotion. This is problematic. When the adaptive
expression of emotions such as anger, grief, attachment, and positive feelings about the self are excluded from consciousness, people are
left with "missing capabilities" (Gustafson, 1986). Their capacities to assert themselves, let go of losses, form close relationships, explore the
environment and nurture themselves are diminished.
Defence mechanisms
Defence mechanisms are ways of obtaining some degree of gratification by striking a compromise between, on the one hand, the experience
and expression of forbidden feelings or activating emotions, such as anger or sexual desire, and on the other hand, inhibiting the experience
and expression of these emotions. Defence mechanisms are used when the client fears losing safety and security if feelings are experienced

and expressed. The more primitive the defence mechanisms, the more likely it is that all aspects of the experience of this type of conflict will
be unconscious.
A list of the main defence mechanisms is given in Table 4.4. The list is based on the defensive functioning scale in appendix B of DSM-IV-
TR (APA, 2000), which organises defence mechanisms into seven levels depending upon their degree of sophistication or maturity. (This very
useful scale was not incorporated into DSM-5 (APA, 2013).) At the highest or most adaptive level, defences regulate anxiety by allowing a
balance to be achieved between forbidden feelings or impulses and prosocial aspirations. This balance maximises the possibilities of
gratification. Also, while the balance is being achieved, the conflicting impulses and wishes are held in consciousness. Anticipation,
affiliation, altruism, humour, self-assertion, self-observation, sublimation and suppression are adaptive defences. At the second level, the
level of mental inhibitions or compromise formation, defences regulate anxiety by keeping forbidden feelings or impulses out of
consciousness. Of these, repression is the prototypical defence. Other defences at this level include displacement, dissociation,
intellectualisation, isolation of affect, reaction formation, and undoing. Minor image distortion of the self or others, through devaluation,
idealisation or omnipotence occurs at the next level. Defences at this level regulate anxiety and self-esteem by enhancing or exaggerating
positive aspects of the image of the self and one's allies and exaggerating negative attributes of others. This self-inflation, promotion of allies
and demotion of foes is typical of the narcissistic personality and thus these defences are referred to as narcissistic defences. At the next
level, anxiety associated with conflict between forbidden feelings or impulses and prosocial standards is regulated by disavowal though
denial, projection or rationalisation. Major image distortion to regulate anxiety associated with conflict occurs at the next level with
consequent occasional cognitive slippage or loss of touch with reality. Splitting is the prototypical defence at this level. Here anxiety is
regulated by demonising some people, seeing them as "all bad" and directing all unacceptable aggressive impulses towards them.
Concurrently a subset of people is idealised, seen as "all good" and all positive feeling projected onto them. This more extreme self-
aggrandisement, idealisation of allies and demonization of foes is typical of the borderline personality and thus these defences are referred
to as borderline defences. At the action level, conflict-related anxiety is regulated by expressing it through behaviour, for example, aggressive


or promiscuous sexual behaviour, or social withdrawal. Where there is a failure to regulate anxiety associated with conflict the person may
struggle to do so by breaking contact with reality and engaging in psychotic denial, distortion or delusional projection.
Table 4.3 The functions of activating and inhibiting emotions, their adaptive and destructive expression, and anxieties that inhibit
activating emotions
Function
Adaptive expression Destructive expression Anxieties that
inhibit activating
emotions
Activating Emotions (F)
Anger
To assert needs,
set limits, protect
against boundary
violations
Assertion
Aggression
I will destroy
relationships
Sexual desire
To mate and
reproduce
Mutual consenting Predatory or
sex
promiscuous sex
I will become
perverted and dirty
Attachment
To nurture others
Closeness, tenderness, Relationship addiction I will be engulfed
care and trust
Positive feelings To nurture the self
towards self
Self-regard
I will become selfish
Grandiosity
Joy
To soothe the self
Self-soothing
Self-indulgence
Excitement and
interest
To explore the environment
Vigorous exploration Reckless risk-taking
I will be punished for
feeling good
I will die from risk-
taking

Grief
To accept loss, relieve pain and elicit attachment from others
Resolving loss
Succumbing to despair I will never be happy again
Inhibiting Emotions (A)
Anxiety
Inhibit behaviour that could threaten safety or security
Careful avoidance of danger
Paralysis or extreme avoidance of danger
Guilt
Inhibits behaviour that is unacceptable to others in society
Remorse
Self-attack
Shame
Inhibits behaviour that is unacceptable to the self
Atonement
Self-hate
Note: Activating affects occupy the F corner of the triangle of conflict. Inhibiting affects occupy the A corner on the triangle of conflict.
Based on McCullough, L., Kuhn, N., Andrews, S., Kaplan, A., Wolf, J., & Hurley, C. (2003). Treating Affect Phobia: A Manual for Short term Dynamic Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford.
Table 4.4 Defence mechanisms at different levels of maturity
Level
Features of defences
Defence
High adaptive level
Promote an optimal balance among unacceptable impulses and prosocial wishes to maximise gratification and
Anticipation
The individual regulates anxiety (A) associated with conflicting wishes or prohibitive injunctions and adaptive feelings, impulses or perceived stresses (F) by ...
Considering emotional reactions and consequences of these before the conflict or stress occurs and exploring

permit conscious awareness of
conflicting impulses and wishes
the pros and cons of various
solutions to these problematic
emotional states
Affiliation
Seeking social support from
others, sharing problems with
them without making them
responsible for them or for
relieving the distress they
entail
Altruism
Dedication to meeting
the needs of others and
receiving gratification from
this (without excessive self-
sacrificing)
Humour
Reframing the situation which
gives rise to conflict or stress in
an ironic or amusing way
Self-assertion
Expressing conflict-related
thoughts or feelings in a direct
yet non-coercive way
Self-observation
Monitoring how situations
lead to conflict or stress and

Mental inhibitions
Compromise formation level
Keep unacceptable impulses out
of awareness
Sublimation
Suppression
Displacement
Dissociation
Intellectualisation
Isolation of affect
using this new understanding
to modify negative affect
Channelling negative
emotions arising from
conflict or stress into socially
acceptable activities such as
work or sports
Intentionally avoiding
thinking about conflict or
stress
Transferring negative feelings
about one person onto another
less threatening person
Experiencing a breakdown
in the integrated functions
of consciousness, memory,
perception, or motor
behaviour
The excessive use of abstract
thinking or generalisations to
minimise disturbing feelings
arising from conflict
Losing touch with the feelings

Reaction formation
associated with descriptive
details of the conflict, trauma
or stress
Substituting acceptable
behaviours, thoughts or
feelings which are the opposite
of unacceptable or unwanted
behaviours, thoughts or
feelings that arise from a
conflict
Repression
Expelling unwanted thoughts,
emotions or wishes from
awareness
Undoing
Using ritualistic or magical
words or behaviour to
symbolically negate or make
amends for unacceptable
impulses
Minor image distorting level
Distort image of self and others
to regulate self-esteem
Devaluation
Idealisation
Attributing exaggerated
negative characteristics to the
self or others
Attributing exaggerated
positive characteristics to

Disavowal level
Major image distorting level
Omnipotence
Keep unacceptable impulses and Denial
ideas out of consciousness with
or without misattribution of
these to external causes
Gross distortion or
misattribution of aspects of the
self or others
Projection
Rationalisation
Autistic fantasy
others
Attributing exaggerated
positive characteristics or
special abilities and powers to
the self which make oneself
superior to others
Refusing to acknowledge
the painful features of the
situation or experiences which
are apparent to others
Attributing to others one's
own unacceptable thoughts,
feelings and wishes
Providing an elaborate self-
serving or self-justifying
explanation to conceal
unacceptable thoughts,
actions or impulses
Engaging in excessive
daydreaming or wishful
thinking as a substitute for
using problem solving or social

Action level
Projective identification
Splitting of self-image or
image of others
Action or withdrawal from action Acting out
Apathetic withdrawal
Help-rejecting complaining
support to deal with emotional
distress
Attributing to others one's
own unacceptable aggressive
impulses. Then inducing
others to feel these by
reacting aggressively to
them. Then using the other
person's aggressive reactions
as justification for acting
out unacceptable aggressive
impulses.
Failing to integrate the positive
and negative qualities of self
and others and viewing self
and others as either all good or
all bad
Acting unacceptably to give
expression to the experience of
emotional distress associated
with conflict or stress
Not engaging with others
Making repeated requests

Level of defensive
dysregulation
Failure of defences to regulate
conflict-related feelings leading
to a breakdown in reality testing
Passive aggression
Delusional projection
Psychotic denial
Psychotic distortion
for help and then rejecting
help when offered as a way
of expressing unacceptable
aggressive impulses
Unassertively expressing
unacceptable aggression
towards others in authority by
overtly complying with their
wishes while covertly resisting
these
Attributing to others one's
own unacceptable thoughts,
feelings and wishes to an
extreme degree
Refusing to acknowledge
the painful features of the
situation or experiences which
are apparent to others to an
extreme degree
Viewing reality in an
extremely distorted way
Note: Based on American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition-Text Revision, DSM-IV-TR,
Defensive Functioning Scale, pp. 807-813), Washington, DC: APA.

When learning BPT, it is important to keep in mind that often defence mechanisms involve the expression of strong emotions in addition to
masking activation emotions. For example, where one partner in a marriage experiences anxiety about having their attachment needs met
and anxiety about expressing these needs, the anxiety may be regulated using the defence of denial which can take the form of extreme rage
at one's partner. In terms of the triangle of conflict in Figure 4.1, in these situations, the need for attachment is the forbidden feeling (F).
The main anxiety is that expressing these needs will lead to rejection (A). The defence expressed as raging anger is denial (D) of the person's
attachment to his or her partner. In emotion-focused couple therapy, the primary intervention is helping couples recognise and express their
attachment needs. Rather than using rage as a defence to regulate anxiety about being rejected if attachment needs are expressed, the couple
is encouraged to give up the defence, bear the fear of rejection and express their need for attachment (Greenberg, 2002, 2010). Emotion-
focused therapy, an evidence-based therapeutic approach which shares some commonalities with BPT, is discussed in Chapter 5.
All defences entail primary and secondary gains. Primary gains are avoidance of forbidden feelings including anger, grief, sexual desire
and so forth. Secondary gains are positive spin-offs from using defences and/or developing symptoms associated with using defences.
Common secondary gains are freedom from the responsibilities of asserting rights, replacing losses, facing personal challenges, managing
interpersonal conflict and so forth. The more primitive a defence mechanism, the more likely it is that the defence and the hidden feeling
will be unconscious and relatively inaccessible to conscious introspection. Also, the more primitive a defence the more likely it is that the
repressed emotion will find expression elsewhere in the person's life. Malan (1995) refers to this as "the return of the repressed." That is,
the forbidden feeling "leaks" back into the person's life and often brings significant secondary gain. In the case of Michael, the primary gain
from his use of reaction formation was avoidance of conflict with authority figures. The secondary gain from the symptoms was that it
gave him a legitimate indirect way to express his opposition to the plans others had for him without having to assert himself directly or
confront others. Thus, his chest pains were a nuisance for his school principal who had to reschedule the meeting. They reduced the chances
of Michael leaving the football club committee because his close supporters would not want him to feel left out at a time when he was clearly

vulnerable. The chest pains also offered the possibility of Michael avoiding Christmas dinner at his in-laws, since they might recur during his
drive home on Christmas day.
Over the lifespan, defences follow a developmental trajectory from the less sophisticated to the more sophisticated (Cramer, 1991). In a
50-year longitudinal study of three large cohorts, Vaillant (2000) found that the use of adaptive or mature defences in early adulthood was
predictive of midlife psychosocial functioning, social support, subjective well-being, marital satisfaction and income. The use of adaptive
defences was also associated with less disability in midlife and greater resilience against developing depression in the face of multiple life
stresses. The Defence Mechanism Rating Scales (Perry & Kardos, 1995) are the best available method for objectively rating defences from
tapes or transcripts, and the DSM-IV-TR defensive functioning scale in Table 4.4 is based on these. Strictly speaking, defences cannot be
measured by self-report instruments because defences operate out of awareness. However, attempts have been made to measure conscious
derivatives of unconscious defence mechanisms using self-report inventories such as the Defence Style Questionnaire (Bond & Wesley,
1996).
Assessment and formulation
The aim of assessment and formulation in brief psychodynamic psychotherapy is to determine how the client's problems may be mapped
out in terms of the triangle of defence and the triangle of person set out in Figure 4.1 and if the client is suitable for BPT.
Assessment interview
Prior to the assessment interview it is helpful to use a questionnaire, such as McCullough's (2003) Psychotherapy Assessment Checklist,
to collect factual information on the client's presenting problems, current symptoms, current levels of stress and support, current level
of functioning and past history. Using a pre-interview questionnaire reduces the need to use the interview for extensive fact-finding and

detailed history taking. Thus the interview can be used for an in-depth exploration of episodes of the presenting problems, the identification
of a core conflict as a focus for therapy, and the formulation of the core conflict in terms of the triangles of conflict and person set out in
Figure 4.1.
At the opening of the intake interview, it is essential to establish a contract for assessment. Assessment for BPT may take between one and
three hours and may involve one long session or one to three shorter sessions. Explain to clients that the aim of the assessment process is to
develop a shared understanding of their difficulties, determine if they have the sorts of difficulties that can benefit from BPT, and if so agree
on a schedule of treatment sessions.
In the intake interview it is useful initially to ask the client to identify their main problems, to rate these on scales of 1 to 10 in terms of
importance and then to give some very specific examples of the main problems. If clients give very general answers, it is important to request
specific examples, because valid formulations can only be based on detailed accounts of specific incidents of significant problems. Here are
some useful questions to elicit specific accounts of significant problems:
• What are the main difficulties or problems in your life at present?
• Right now, on a scale of 1 to 10, how big a problem is each of these for you?
• If you were to rank-order your top three problems, which would be the one you most want help with now?
Can you tell me about the last time that problem happened?
• How did it start and what exactly happened?
• How were you feeling and how do you think the other person was feeling during this incident?
• What was the hardest thing for you about this incident?
• After the incident, in what ways were you worse off and in what ways were you better off?
• Can you tell me about another specific example of that sort of problem?


When listening to the answers to these questions, do so with the triangle of conflict in mind, asking yourself questions about the forbidden
feeling (F), the inhibitory anxiety (A) and the defence (D) being used.
First ask yourself, "if the client were to express an adaptive activating emotion in this situation that showed compassion for both self and
others or helped them deal with a loss or a boundary violation, what would the activating emotion be? Which of the emotions in Table 4.3
would it be?" The most common are anger, grief, attachment and positive feelings towards the self. Other possibilities are sexual desire, joy,
excitement and interest.
A second question to ask yourself is, "assuming that the client is feeling anxiety, shame or guilt (inhibitory emotions) because of the
danger of expressing an activating emotion, what must he or she be saying to himself or herself?" The answer to this question will take the
form of a statement like this: "I'm scared, ashamed or guilty of expressing X, because if I do, then Y will happen and that will mean something
bad about myself or others or my relationships." Common anxieties about expressing forbidden feelings are given in the right-hand column
of Table 4.3.
The third question to ask yourself is, "what is the client thinking, doing or feeling to manage their anxiety about expressing their forbidden
feelings or to keep their forbidden feelings out of consciousness? Is the client using a defence listed in Table 4.4?"
The outcome of these three reflexive questions is a preliminary formulation in terms of the triangle of conflict, which takes the form: "In
this type of situation the client uses this defence (D) because they experience this anxiety (A) about this forbidden feeling (F)."
With that preliminary D-A-F formulation in mind, proceed to ask the client about a few more specific similar episodes in different areas
of their lives such as family, work and leisure contexts. Also ask about situations involving different symptoms or problems. Use the client's
responses to these questions to gradually refine the D-A-F formulation based on the triangle of conflict. For Michael, three specific situations
were identified in which chest pains occurred: one involving his school principal at work, one involving his father-in-law within a family
context, and one involving the chairman of the football club committee. He also recounted incidents in which he felt particularly anxious
and depressed, which he identified as his other two main problems. These problems seemed to occur not in further episodes of interaction

with others but when he was reflecting on the three situations in which he experienced the chest pain. In Michael's case the D-A-F triangle
of conflict formulation was that he used reaction formation as a defence (D) to regulate anxiety (A) about expressing the forbidden feeling of
anger (F).
By asking for a series of situations in which the client's problems occurred and formulating these in terms of the triangle of conflict, the
D-A-F formulation is refined. Hypotheses emerge about significant people in the client's life who occupy the C and P poles in the triangle of
person. With Michael, it became clear that his school principal, his father-in-law, and club chairman all occupied the C pole of the triangle of
person. It seemed that Michael perceived all three as authority figures.
Once people who occupy the C pole of the triangle of person have been identified, the next step is to make a hypothesis, based on what
they hold in common, about the types of people in the client's childhood who might have engaged in similar types of episodes with the client
and enquire about these. For example, Michael was asked to describe situations from his childhood in which parents and teachers or coaches
whom he saw as having authority over him expressed wishes about how he should manage challenging situations, and how he reacted in
these situations. He described many situations in which he perceived their expressed wishes to be commands with which he felt compelled
to cooperatively comply, despite the personal costs.
With examples of how the triangle of conflict has been played out at the C and P poles of the triangle of person, it is then possible
to make hypotheses about how this core conflict will find expression within the therapeutic relationship at the T pole of the triangle of
person. For Michael, the hypothesis was that if he engaged in therapy, it was probable that his transference reactions would involve reaction
formation. That is, it was expected that when anger at the therapist was provoked by challenge or disappointment, he would behave in a
very cooperative way rather than assertively expressing his anger towards the therapist. In fact this hypothesis was supported by Michael's
reaction to the therapist's statement about rescheduling appointments mentioned earlier in the section on desensitisation to affect phobias.
Once the core conflict has been formulated in terms of the triangles of conflict and person outlined in Figure 4.1, specific hypotheses
may be made about the specific affect phobias to which the client needs to be desensitised. In Michael's case the hypothesis was that he was

fearfully avoidant of expressing anger in an assertive way to authority figures. He needed to be exposed to increasingly stronger feelings
of anger associated with such situations, while being prevented from using reaction formation to escape from the anxiety associated with
experiencing these forbidden feelings.
At the end of the assessment phase the formulation is presented in terms of the triangles of conflict and person to the client. In offering
the formulation, the elements should be presented from the least anxiety-provoking to the most anxiety-provoking. Tentative rather than
definite language should be used throughout the process to minimise threat to the client and to allow scope for refinement based on
feedback. In presenting the formulation, the specific examples, situations or episodes on which the general formulation is based are specified
first. The sense of anxiety (A) or being ill at ease is presented second and the defence (D) used to manage this anxiety is interpreted third. The
fourth and most anxiety-provoking aspect of the interpretation, the forbidden feeling (F) or impulse, is offered next in tentative language.
Finally links may be made within the triangle of person to the way this D-A-F pattern in the present (C) is replicating similar patterns learned
in childhood through interacting with parents and caregivers (P). Here is how a formulation was presented to Michael, whose case vignette
opened this chapter: for clarity, this interpretation is given here as a single paragraph, but it was spread over the second half-hour of the
second assessment session, and Michael responded to each aspect of the interpretation in detail.
"It seems that there is a recurring theme in the three episodes you have described. In all of them you noticed that the chest pain occurred
after you had had a conversation in which you felt a bit ill at ease: the conversations with your school principal about the presentation, with
your father-in-law about Christmas dinner, and with the chairman of the committee about possibly stepping down (C). None of these was
easy (A). Does that fit for you? ... In all three of these conversations, you spoke in a very agreeable and cooperative way (D) with each of these
people, and to some degree that made you feel a little less ill at ease? Is that accurate? Now, this is speculation on my part, but another
common thread in all of these situations is that you felt as if you were being asked to do something that for one reason or another was a
bit difficult, put you out a bit or was not what you wanted to do. With your school principal, he wanted you to work through the weekend
and produce a presentation for Monday morning. With your father-in-law, he wanted you to change your plans for Christmas day. And the

chairman at the football club wanted you to step down from a committee you enjoy contributing to. Does that fit with your view of the
situation? ... There is a possibility that in each instance you may have felt some irritation or anger with these three men for asking you to do
things that may feel to you a bit unfair (F). I need to check that possibility with you ... There is one further thing I need to check with you. It
may be that you felt unable to express your views about the unfairness of their requests or wishes because you have learned in the course of
your life as you were growing up at home with your parents (P) that good men support those older or wiser or with greater authority than
themselves? ... So if we put these parts together... I'm wondering if you sense there may be links here between the chest pain, the agreeable
way you spoke (D) to the three people (C) in the situations you described, your possible irritation or anger towards them (F) for their unfair
requests, and your beliefs about not questioning the wishes of these sorts of people (A) that you learned as a youngster (P)?"
Overall, Michael accepted the formulation, but did, understandably, show resistance to accepting the degree of anger he felt towards
authority figures, an issue that later became central to the therapy. The fact that he responded to the interpretation so well suggested that he
was a suitable candidate for BPT.
Developing a psychodynamic formulation and offering it to clients in such a way that it is at least partially accepted is fraught with
pitfalls. One problem is offering an inaccurate formulation that does not fit with the client's experience. To overcome this, always present
interpretations very tentatively and check the degree to which the client can accept it. A second difficulty is interpreting the forbidden
feeling (F) before interpreting the anxiety (A) and the defence (D), causing the client to intensify their defences. This is the most common
mistake in the general category of "interpreting too much too soon" and not pacing the process to match the client's readiness for insight.
If this happens, shift the focus to an exploration of the client's experience of anxiety and the defences used to regulate it and then interpret
the anxiety and the defence within the therapeutic relationship (T). That is, work towards making a transference interpretation. Here is an
example:
"I noticed just now that when I suggested that your willingness to cooperate with people in authority (D) even when you perceived them
making unfair demands on you might be your way of managing your fear (A) of expressing anger (F) towards them, this idea led you to give

me a detailed account of a book you had read on the psychology of teamwork. You then said that this book said cooperation, not competition,
was the key to good teamwork. I'm wondering if you could describe to me what the hardest thing was about listening to me suggesting the
link between your cooperation with your school principal, and possible anger.... Could there be a link between me asking you to consider a
very difficult interpretation to accept and you responding with a helpful account of a book on teamwork? ... It seems to be the same pattern
as happened with your school principal. We both asked you to do something quite demanding, and your response in each instance was a
very high level of cooperation (D). Can we explore what the concerns (A) and feelings (F) might be that lead you to this level of cooperation?"
Assessing suitability for BPT
Clients particularly well suited to psychodynamic psychotherapy have some or all of the characteristics listed in Table 4.1 (Aveline, 1995;
McCullough et al., 2003; Piper et al., 2002). First, they experience sufficient psychological distress to be motivated to seek therapy and to
commit to a therapeutic contract. Usually people who have been "sent" to therapy by a third party and have not actively sought out therapy
themselves are insufficiently motivated to engage in and benefit from brief psychodynamic psychotherapy. On this criterion, Michael was
suited to therapy, having made an appointment himself at an outpatient clinic.
Second, those suited for brief psychodynamic psychotherapy have the capacity to form a therapeutic alliance. This is typically evidenced
by a history of having made and maintained at least one meaningful long-standing relationship in their lives. Piper et al. (2002) have
developed a five-point quality of object relations scale for rating the capacity to make and maintain relationships based on clients' accounts
of their relationships in childhood, adolescence and adulthood. (In the psychoanalytic tradition, "object" is the term that has been used to
refer to significant other people with whom we have relationships, notable caregivers, or parents or key people in our adult networks.) Piper
distinguishes between mature, triangular, controlling, searching and primitive levels of object relations. At the mature level, the person
engages in equitable relationships characterised by love, kindness and concern for others. At the triangular level, the person engages in real
or fantasised triangular relationships marked by competition to win the affection of one person by gaining victory over another person.

Michael was functioning at the mature level in his relationship with his wife but at the triangular level in his relationship with his father,
the school principal and the chairman of the club. At the controlling level, relationships are marked by well-meaning attempts to control
or possess others. At the searching level, the person is constantly driven by an attempt to find a substitute for a lost caregiver, but the relief
provided by substitutes inevitably give way to disillusionment and the re-experience of loss. At the primitive level, the person becomes
highly dependent on others and reacts with intense anxiety and anger to actual or potential disapproval, separation or loss. The five levels of
the quality of object relations partially correspond to attachment styles (Cassidy & Shaver, 2008). The mature level corresponds to a secure
attachment style where there are positive internal working models of the self and others. The primitive level corresponds to a preoccupied
attachment style where working models of the self and other are both negative. Piper et al. (2002) have shown in a series of studies that
higher scores on this scale are associated with a better response to therapy.
The third characteristic of clients suitable for psychodynamic therapy is that they are psychologically minded. Piper et al. (2002) have
shown a clear relationship between psychological-mindedness and outcome in psychodynamic therapy. Psychologically minded clients are
willing to explore how personal difficulties may arise when particular defence mechanisms are used to deal with conflict between their
impulses to act in certain ways and their aspirations to conform to societal norms. Psychologically minded people are also willing to explore
how their characteristic ways of making and maintaining relationships have evolved over their life and how these relationship styles
subserve their personal distress. One way to assess this psychological-mindedness is by offering a trial interpretation using the formulation
involving the triangles of conflict and person set out in Figure 4.1. In the previous section, an example was given of how a trial interpretation
was offered to Michael. His response to this trial interpretation was positive: he thought about it for a while, identified with some aspects of
it and was willing to discuss it further. This underlined his suitability for therapy. Had he insisted that his chest pains were evidence of an
undetected cardiac problem, and refused to consider a psychodynamic formulation, he would have been judged unsuitable for BPT.
The fourth characteristic of clients suitable for psychodynamic therapy is that they have the capacity to tolerate strong affect associated
with interpersonal conflict without acting impulsively, and to explore this when it is enacted within the therapeutic relationship. A

willingness to experience some degree of sadness, anger, anxiety or joy, often as part of recounting an intense emotional event, is good
evidence for having met this criterion. Where emotional conflict has led to violence, self-harm, or serious drug or alcohol abuse, this
suggests the client has limited ability to tolerate strong conflict-related affect.
A fifth suitability criterion is having the courage to explore more adaptive ways of managing intrapsychic conflicts and interpersonal
challenges. Where clients make it clear that they are ready to start changing the way they manage their feelings, their relationships or their
lives, this criterion is met. A sixth criterion is the presence of a relatively stable life situation and some degree of social support. Socially
isolated individuals with multiple life stresses and no stable job or home situation would not meet this criterion. Finally, for time-limited
therapy clients must be able to collaborate in establishing a clear focus for therapy. This is shown by a willingness to work collaboratively to
develop a preliminary formulation based on the conceptual framework in Figure 4.1.
The Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF; Luborsky, 1962) scale is useful in determining suitability for treatment. Clients with GAF
scores above 50 are usually suitable for short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy (McCullough et al., 2003). Clients with schizophrenia
or other psychoses; severe drug dependence; suicidal intent; severe anger management problems; borderline, antisocial or narcissistic
personality disorders; and moderate or severe intellectual disability are unsuitable for brief psychodynamic psychotherapy. Clients with
mood and anxiety disorders, somatoform disorders, and avoidant and dependent personality disorders have been shown in controlled trials
to benefit from this approach to treatment (Leichsenring et al., 2014; Leichsenring & Klein, 2014; PDM Taskforce, 2006).
Treatment
In BPT, the therapeutic contract has four key elements. First, a specified limited number of regular, frequent therapy sessions of fixed
duration are scheduled. For example, these may be of 50 minutes' duration and held once or twice a week at the same time in the same
location, and the session limit may vary from 12 to 30 sessions (3-6 months). Second, clients agree that for the duration of therapy they


will not make major life changes (such as moving countries or getting married), attempt suicide or contact the therapist outside agreed
scheduled sessions. Third, the client is invited to report without censorship what comes into consciousness and not to "edit out" apparently
irrational or socially unacceptable thoughts, feelings, images, memories, dreams and fantasies which occur to them during the therapy
sessions. Fourth, therapists adopt a style in which they convey to the client that they will listen attentively, offer interpretations and other
interventions, but will not gratify the client's needs for personal information about the therapist or physical contact with the therapist.
The main BPT treatment strategies and techniques are listed in Table 4.2. They fall into three categories, in line with the main goals of
BPT: to restructure defences, affects and self-other representations. As an overall guideline, therapy typically progresses from restructuring
defences to affects. With very high-functioning clients, who obtain GAF scores between 70 and 80, it may be more efficient to begin with
restructuring affect, since often the assessment process itself is sufficient to allow the client to want to relinquish defences. With low-
functioning clients who obtain GAF scores close to 50, begin with self-other restructuring. Where people have borderline or narcissistic
personality disorders, defence restructuring should be slowly paced after self-other restructuring has occurred. However, these guidelines
are not rigid, and throughout the course of therapy interventions in all three categories are made.
Defence restructuring
The two main strategies for defence restructuring are defence recognition and relinquishment. The first aims to give the client insight into
their defence. The second facilitates letting go of defences so that forbidden feelings may be fully experienced.
Defence recognition
With defence recognition, listen carefully to the client's uncensored account with the dynamic formulation developed during the
assessment sessions in the back of your mind. Also hold in mind your hypothesis about the main forbidden feeling to which the client needs
to be desensitised. When opportunities arise, tentatively point out where defences are used to manage anxiety associated with forbidden


feelings. Explore with the client or tentatively speculate out loud what forbidden feeling (F) is being excluded from consciousness and why
(A). In doing this, adopt an empathic collaborative position. Let the client know that you could understand why there might be a need to use
the defence to keep certain feelings and ideas out of consciousness. Communicate that you are aware that the client may be experiencing
guilt, shame or anxiety about forbidden feelings. In validating the client's defences, the aim is to help the client replace shame with self-
compassion. It is essential to avoid pointing out defences in a way that clients will interpret as criticism, since this will compound the client's
sense of shame, guilt and anxiety.
Repeatedly point out defences until the client routinely recognise when defences are used and reaches a position where defences are
accepted as the best available way to cope with forbidden feelings at the time they were initially learned. But it is now time to find a better
way. Here are some examples of defence recognition interventions:

• I noticed that when you talk about that painful time in your life, you speak without showing much feeling.
• When you spoke of your mother's death, it looked like you were about to cry but you stopped yourself and quickly made a joke.
• Just now you changed the subject before finishing your account of the argument with your husband. I'm wondering about that.
• When you cry like this, it seems to make you feel worse rather than to bring relief. Is that the way it feels to you?
• In that story, you portray yourself as a real villain and your sister as a paragon of virtue. Can you make sense of that?
• It seems you criticised your brother, but wanted to criticise someone else. Who might that have been?

During defence identification, when opportunities arise, point out existing exceptions to using defences, and label these as strengths. For
example:

• You say you have trouble with closeness, but Barry has been your friend since primary school.


• You are down on yourself for so many things, so it's good today for you to tell me about your achievements.
When clients resist acknowledging defences, invite them to do experiments that involve temporarily relinquishing their defences. For
example, a client who does not accept that he uses avoidance of eye contact as a defence when talking about grief may be invited as an
experiment to describe what he feels when he sustains eye contact while talking about grief.
To summarise, the aim is to help clients recognise the defences they use, to wonder with the client about what is defended against and why,
and to provide empathic support and validation to the client in this. An example of this with Michael follows:
Therapist (T): I notice that as you were telling me all the reasons why going to your in-laws for Christmas will be good for everyone in your
family, your spoke very rapidly and seemed quite tense [D].
Michael (M): Yes, I suppose I do feel quite jumpy when I think about going.
T: What's the hardest part about thinking of it?
M: I, just, well, being trapped there for the whole day [D]. (smiles wryly) Maybe I'm not so thrilled about going [F] ... It's a bit of a nuisance,
it's irritating.
T: It seems like it is difficult for you to feel irritated [F] about having to go to your in-laws. I wonder if feeling irritated makes you feel very
guilty [A]?
M: Well, it does a bit, I suppose. Yes, a lot really. I feel like I'm disappointing my wife's parents [C]. They love our kids and would love to see
more of them, and Christmas is such a time for children that they really want to be part of it, on the day itself. They're really looking forward
to it and I hate to be the one that stops it [A] happening just because I don't want to go [F]. It wouldn't be fair to them; they're old, they may
not have many Christmases left with the kids, it would bring them a lot of happiness.
T: It sounds to me very similar to other examples you've told me, where you expected yourself to put the needs of your "elders," particularly
your father and grandfather [P], above your own [D], something that was important in your family growing up.


M: Well, I suppose so. For instance, we always went to my mother's parents at Christmas time and my father didn't seem to mind.
Although, now that I think of it, he never seemed to enjoy it much, he was a bit quiet and usually fell asleep for most of it. But yes, he still
went, probably to show respect to his father-in-law, which I admire. I think I should be able to do that too. We were always encouraged as
children to follow that example.
T: You feel "good" when you are pleasing your "elders" [C and P] but it also sounds like you feel irritated and even angry [F] that you are so
often sacrificing what you want. I wonder if feeling angry [F] makes you feel guilty and uncomfortable [A] so that it is easier to try to just
please everyone [D]? Does that fit at all with how you feel about this Christmas issue?
M: Yes, a bit. I wouldn't say I feel angry, but irritated, yes. Yes, irritated [F]. It would be nice to spend Christmas in our own home, for once,
cook what we want to eat, watch a film I want for a change. I'd probably be in better form too, for the kids. But it's really hard to ask for that
without feeling selfish and mean.
Defence relinquishing
When clients are capable of routinely identifying their use of defences to regulate anxiety about experiencing or expressing forbidden
feelings, the next step is to help them become motivated to let go of these defences, use them less frequently or use more adaptive defences.
Begin by helping clients to identify the benefits and costs of defences. The primary gain for using any defences is avoidance of the forbidden
feeling, for example grief or anger. The secondary gains are those positive outcomes associated with the defence and related symptoms,
for example avoiding responsibilities and being cared for by others, avoiding unfamiliar life changes, avoiding closeness and achieving the
safety of isolation. The main cost of using defences is that the adaptive function or capability associated with the forbidden affect is lost or
compromised. So, defences can prevent clients from asserting their rights when anger is inhibited, engaging in fulfilling sex when sexual
desire is inhibited, maintaining supportive relationships when attachment is inhibited, nurturing the self when positive feelings towards

the self are inhibited, facing personal challenges when excitement and joy are inhibited, and resolving and replacing losses when grief is
inhibited.
Along with helping clients weigh up the costs and benefits of retaining and relinquishing defences, help them trace the origins of their
defences in childhood and how they are now maintained in adulthood. Invite clients to describe situations involving their parents, siblings
and carers in which they might have felt their safety and security would be threatened if they expressed their forbidden feelings, and help
them to articulate how they began to use defences to inhibit the expression of these affects and impulses. Then invite them to explore how
they continued to use these defences in adulthood with people other than their parents, siblings and carers.
After building self-compassion by tracing the origins of defences in childhood through to their maintenance in adulthood and exploring
costs and benefits of defences, some clients eventually arrive at a situation where they realise that their defences have cost them dearly. They
recognise that there have been many missed opportunities in their lives where they could have acted assertively, or fulfilled their sexual
needs or their needs for attachment, or felt positively about themselves or experienced joy or excitement or resolved their losses. Invite
clients to grieve these losses in therapy. All of these defence relinquishing interventions need to be repeated to increase motivation to give up
defences. However, letting go of defences is very anxiety-provoking, so help clients to regulate this anxiety. For example, you may say, "this
way of handling sadness/anger/closeness has had its downside but it has also stood you in good stead. You are thinking of handling these
feelings in a different way now. So, I'm wondering what the most difficult thing about making this change is going to be?"
To summarise, the aim is to help clients increase their motivation to give up defences by helping clients identify pros and cons of
defences, including primary and secondary gains; identify the origins and maintenance of defences; identify the maladaptive effects of
using defences; grieve the losses associated with defence use; and identify and work towards using alternative adaptive behaviours or more
mature defences. An example of this with Michael follows:
Therapist (T): When you think about trying to give up this pattern of saying nothing about what you want, what is the most difficult or
overwhelming part of it for you?


Michael (M): Well, I don't know really, maybe, maybe asking and being told "no," "you shouldn't need that," or "who do you think you are?
why are you so special?" [A-rejection]
T: It seems quite sad that you have learned to hide what you want so regularly from others. You've put others first for so long, it sounds like
you don't often think about what you want or don't expect others to be interested in pleasing you or responding to what you need.
M: Yes, when you put it that way, it is sad. Lots of lost opportunities.
T: Yes, maybe many times when you just suffered in silence you could have gotten so much more from situations.
M: Yes, I suppose so. I hadn't really thought about it, but yes, I think my wife would probably like to do things for me. She cares, but I don't
often ask her for much. Hardly ever, really. And I can see how I've let people take advantage of me quite a bit, been the martyr a bit at work,
not delegating enough, taking too much on and being a bit of a "superman." I think I do resent that more than I realised and it's wearing me
out. But I'm not sure what else I can do ...
Later in the session:
T: And I wonder too about the panic attacks you've had recently. We've noticed that they happened when you wanted something but felt
too guilty to ask and just went along. Can we talk about what was good and bad about those attacks?
M: Well, the downside was I felt awful, really unwell and scared, and a bit foolish too, in front of everyone.
T: Yes, it sounded really unpleasant. I wonder if there was an upside too?
M: Well, I suppose in a sort of way, yes, in that people were very kind. I realised they cared quite a bit and they, well, they took some of the
pressures off, stopped making so many demands on me.
T: So while it was really unpleasant at the time and you felt foolish, it also helped you feel cared for and people backed off a little without
you having to ask them to. Is that right?
M: Yes, I think so. Yes. There was a bit of an upside because I really don't like having to ask for things or having to say no to people.
Later in the session:


T: I can see how guilty you feel about being irritated with your school principal when he asked you to coordinate the rosters for yard duty
as well as meeting with those difficult parents after school. You seem really ashamed of feeling irritated. What is the most shameful piece
about feeling irritated?
M: Well, I just feel so selfish, and small, and just, well, petty. They are small things to do for others, that I shouldn't feel annoyed. I shouldn't
mind. I should just be able to do these things "with a good grace" as my dad used to say. That was always the way it was in our house, you were
never allowed to say no. If you could do a favour, well then you should do it and do it willingly.
T: That's a tough standard to live up to, and a powerful message to get from your parents. No wonder it is so important to you now. But I
wonder if it is a rule that you want to continue to live by, as an adult, or something you want to be more flexible with?
M: When you put it that way, well, I've never thought about it that way before. I just thought that was how everyone lives, although, no,
they don't really, because most people aren't nearly as considerate or helpful as I try to be, which again, I think I resent. Probably other people
aren't so bothered by feeling resentful and put upon too, they probably don't feel as irritated as often because they're not constantly trying
to keep everyone happy. It would be nice not to always have to please everyone.
Affect restructuring
The two main strategies for affect restructuring are affect experiencing and expression. The first aims to desensitise the client to their
forbidden feelings and the second facilitates the development of adaptive ways to express these feelings.
Affect experiencing
With affect experiencing, the aim is to help clients move in graded steps towards fully experiencing their forbidden feelings (F), without
experiencing the punishing emotions of shame, guilt and anxiety (A) and without using their defences (D). Affect experiencing is a process
of imaginal systematic desensitisation. First, brief the client about the rationale and procedures for affect experiencing. Explain that to be

able to use their feelings fully to help them live happier lives, they have to fully experience the feelings they habitually try to avoid. To do this,
they will be invited to select a few situations in which they might have such feelings. Then in a relaxed state with their eyes closed, they will
be asked to imagine themselves in these situations experiencing their forbidden feelings and tolerating the distress associated with this
until it passes, and that this process will be repeated until the forbidden feelings no longer make them feel distressed. Agree on a series of
interaction scenarios that they will use for the desensitisation procedure. Then invite the client to relax. Bring to mind in vivid detail an
image of an agreed interaction with parents, siblings or carers from their past (P) or an interaction with significant people from their current
life situation (C). The interaction must evoke the forbidden feeling. Ask the client to describe the interaction in detail and their experience of
the forbidden feeling (F). Specifically ask them first to name the feeling. Often clients confuse feelings such as boredom and sadness, or anger
and excitement. Then ask them to describe how the feeling is experienced physiologically in their body. Do they feel aroused, relaxed, ready
for action or quiet and still? Then ask about the images that accompany the feeling. Encourage clients to describe in vivid detail what the
feeling would make them want to do if they allowed it to guide their actions. For example, do they have images of standing up for their rights,
or moving closer to someone, or crying to feel relief? As the anxiety, shame and guilt (A) concurrently arise, invite the client not to use their
usual defences and to try to tolerate the anxiety by describing in detail the fear, shame or sense of guilt associated with experiencing the
forbidden feeling. Help the client regulate anxiety by asking, "what is the most difficult/frightening/humiliating thing about experiencing
this feeling of rage/sexual desire/closeness/grief/joy/self-caring/excitement?" Some of the common anxieties that clients feel when they
allow themselves to experience forbidden feelings are listed in the right-hand column of Table 4.3. Contain the client's discomfort by letting
them know that if they can stay with the forbidden feeling long enough, the anxiety, shame and guilt will pass. Empathise with their
distress. This aspect of the process is very demanding, because it requires you to be able to tolerate high levels of intense negative affect,
something that is easier to do if you have been through uncovering therapy yourself. Once the client has reduced their anxiety to the
imagined scenario, invite them immediately to either imagine it again and allow them to experience the feelings more intensely or move on
to another scenario which has the potential to more strongly evoke the forbidden feeling.

To intensify exposure to feelings, reflect back clients' statements about their feelings, and statements about the bodily sensations
associated with these. For example if a client says, "when I see her like this I feel so sad, I feel the tears welling up inside me," this may be
reflected back as, "you feel so sad and the tears are welling up inside you." Further intensify feelings by inviting clients to elaborate details
of images associated with the forbidden feelings by asking questions such as, "can you describe exactly what you can see right now? Can
you smell the smoke from your mother's cigarette? Notice the colour of the carpet and wallpaper?" Encourage clients to imagine the most
extreme acts that their forbidden feelings might lead them to. Balint (1968) referred to the process of having these extreme fantasies based
on forbidden feelings as regression in the service of the ego. They might include sadistic anger, promiscuous sex or infantile dependency.
Tolerating experiencing these extreme forbidden feelings reduces the need to act out, and in this sense the regressive fantasies are in the
service of the ego. It is important to reassure clients that it is acceptable to experience these imaginary outcomes of their adaptive emotions,
which are distinct from actual courses of action they might take in real life. Invite clients describing scenarios from the past to say things
that they would have said if they had been allowed to express their forbidden feelings. For example, "if you had allowed yourself to feel these
feelings back then, what would you have liked to say to your mother? ... Can you tell her that now in your fantasy and see how it feels? ... Now
tell her again and notice the feeling." Some clients find it helpful to imagine the person from their past sitting in an empty chair opposite
them and then to conduct a dialogue with them. This practice, widely used by gestalt therapists, is known as the empty-chair or two-chair
technique.
The process of affect experiencing does not always run smoothly. A common error is to mistake an emotion used as a defence for
a forbidden feeling. For example tearful self-hating, victimised sadness used as a defence (D) to regulate anxiety (A) about expressing
aggression (F) may be mistaken for the adaptive emotion of grief. Where clients are helped to intensify their experiencing of these defensive
emotions, it inadvertently strengthens their defences and cuts them off even more from their forbidden feelings! However, this mistake
can be spotted. If clients experience their emotions in their body and in their images as closing down the possibility of the adaptive actions
listed in the third column of Table 4.3, then it is best to assume that the emotion is a defence (D) rather than a forbidden feeling (F). Another

difficulty is that clients may misinterpret the invitation to experience and tolerate strong forbidden feelings as a licence to get their feelings
out by shouting or crying or acting out their feelings by hurting themselves or other people or damaging property. In these situations, help
the client to calm down. Then explain that the aim of therapy is to be able to manage the forbidden feelings by tolerating experiencing
and then deciding how to use this experience to do something adaptive rather than destructive. The process of desensitisation takes time.
Affect experiencing has to be repeated frequently for each of the client's main forbidden feelings. For example, Michael would be invited
and encouraged to recognise and tolerate his own feelings of anger towards his school principal, the committee chairperson, therapist and
his father, without defending by being overly cooperative, and with assistance from the therapist in managing his fears about the negative
effects of experiencing anger.
To summarise, the aim is to help clients be exposed in imagination to the forbidden feelings [F] without responding with a defence [D], and
to support clients in managing the associated anxiety [A] until it subsides. An example of this with Michael follows:
Therapist (T): We talked about looking at some feelings in more depth. Let's stay with that example you brought up of how you felt tense
after the principal made those three demands on you. Even as you talked about it, you seemed tense. Can you describe how you felt about him
giving you all those tasks when he knew you were so busy?
Michael (M): Well, I think he's busy too, we all are, but even still, I felt a bit annoyed, because he'd just dumped a lot of other things on me
recently. The more I do, the more I get to do, so I suppose, yes, I feel annoyed.
T: Where do you experience that annoyance in your body?
M: Hmm, I'll have to think about that. Kind of agitated, like I want to let out energy, go for a run. So probably in my legs, the urge to do
something physical.
T: All that annoyance that you're holding in, if you were to experience it, what do you imagine doing or saying?
M: I don't know. Maybe shout at him to make him see what he's putting on me! Or shake him.
T: So you want to shout at him or shake him.


M: Yes, make him stop taking me for granted, pushing me around! Not that I would, really.
T: It's really common to want to shake or shout at someone. We're talking about feelings, not behaviours, and imagining something is not
the same as doing it. You look a bit uncertain and tense right now
M: Well, I just felt that what I said was just so, angry. I didn't realise I felt so angry about this. It just felt a bit, well, much. It really sounds
like I'm over-reacting completely. I should just get on with the job.
T: Yet, that is what you normally try to do, to dismiss the anger and so you get a bit stuck. The process of sitting with this anger for a while
may actually help you move on from it and give you back the energy you normally spend trying not to be angry.
M: Well, yes, it is exhausting trying to be so nice all the time. So you think we should keep at this?
Therapist: If you're ready, let's look at that annoyed feeling a bit more.
Affect expression
With affect expression, the aim is to facilitate client's exploring adaptive ways to express forbidden feelings and to explore ways to tolerate
interpersonal conflict in real-life situations (in vivo) rather than in imagination. Affect expression aims to help clients express anger as
assertion, express sexual desire within mutually satisfying sexual relationships, express the need for attachment by engaging in close,
trusting relationships, express positive emotions towards self and joy without shame or guilt, pursue interests enthusiastically, and express
grief in a way that resolves losses. For clients to be able to express their emotions and needs in these ways, they require skills. In addition
to expressive skills they also need receptive skills so that they can respond appropriately to the emotional expression of others. First assess
the client's skills for expressing emotions and responding to the emotions of others in those areas where they have had an affect phobia.
Ask the clients what they would do in situations where they wished to express forbidden feelings (F) in an adaptive way and role-play
such situations. If clients have limited skills for expressing emotions and understanding and responding to specific emotional responses
of others, coach them in communication, problem-solving and assertion skills (described in Chapter 3 on CBT). Help clients anticipate

situations in which they may experience interpersonal conflict and invite them to be prepared to tolerate emotional discomfort, such as fears
about the consequences of expressing emotions in these situations. Then invite clients for homework to enter situations in vivo that elicit
their forbidden feelings, to tolerate these and adaptively express them, and tolerate the interpersonal conflict that may arise from them. For
example, Michael would be invited to imagine and later role-play with the therapist a situation where he would say to his father-in-law that
he and his family would be having Christmas dinner in their own house and would love to come to dinner on New Year's Day instead. He
might be given a homework task of broaching this with his wife first and later his father-in-law.
Repeat affect expression interventions until new ways of expressing forbidden feelings flow naturally.
One of the pitfalls with affect restructuring is to move from affect experiencing to affect expression too rapidly, before the affect phobia
has been sufficiently desensitised. In these circumstances clients go through the motions of expressing forbidden feelings in new and
adaptive ways without actually letting themselves experience the emotions. If this occurs, invite the client to go back to further affect-
experiencing work and then desensitise the client to their affect phobia.
To summarise, the aim is to help clients practise in "real-life" situations, expressing feelings without defending so that anxiety subsides.
The therapist helps the client to express emotion and tolerate expressions of emotions by others, to deal with interpersonal conflict that may
arise and to integrate affects for better emotional expression. The therapist trains the client in skills, such as assertiveness, as needed. An
example of this with Michael follows:
Therapist (T): This Christmas day invite to your in-laws that you don't want to accept, perhaps that could be a way for you to practise
expressing your wishes assertively. Could we look at that here today?
Michael (M): Okay, although I can just imagine how hurt they will look if I said we weren't coming.
T: So at first they'd be very upset.
M: Oh yes, very. Disappointed. I feel guilty just imagining saying it.

T: Let's try to work on that situation right now so that it is not so hard to do in reality. Remember in the last few weeks we've looked at
assertiveness skills? Let's look at a few ways you might be able to broach this with them and a few ways you might respond if they express
disappointment. Do you remember we talked about blending positive and negative statements in a situation where there was conflict?
M: Yes, I tried that this week with my wife and it worked quite well. I still felt a bit nervous and a bit guilty, but she responded really well.
T: Great. Let's see if you could come up with one now for broaching things with your in-laws.
M: Well, let's see, "We really appreciate you asking us for Christmas day and we enjoy spending time with you over the holiday period. We
also enjoy being in our own place, especially when we are not working and the kids are off school. Christmas day in particular, the kids like
to be home so they can use all their new gifts, they're so excited with what they get. We'd love to come and spend time with you later in the
week. Could we come over on New Year's Day, and maybe you'd like to come to us the day after Christmas?"
T: So how are you feeling after that?
M: Not so bad.
T: What was the hardest part of saying that?
M: I felt a bit tense, bit apprehensive about what reaction I'd get, but generally okay.
T: Okay, so shall we have a go at a role-play next and work on how you respond to how they react?
M: Okay, I'll give it a go. But to make it real, you'll have to look really disappointed when I tell you I'm not coming, so that it's real practice
for what it's going to be like for me!
Self-other restructuring
With self-other restructuring the aim is to help clients develop a more accurate perception of the self and others and to treat the self
and others with greater compassion. High-functioning clients with GAF scores above 60 require little self-other restructuring. But lower-
functioning clients, particularly those with personality disorders, GAF scores at 50 or below, low self-esteem, poor impulse control, and

difficulties making and maintaining relationships require self-other restructuring before defence or affect restructuring can be attempted.
These clients hold inaccurate views of themselves and others that are distorted by an inability to tolerate positive feelings about themselves
or positive feelings from others. This avoidance of positive feelings about the self and positive emotions from others must be overcome
before engaging in the type of therapy described so far in this chapter.
Self-restructuring
The aim of self-restructuring is to help clients be receptive to their own positive feelings about themselves, to view the self from the
perspective of others, to integrate positive and negative feelings towards the self, and to engage in self-parenting. Desensitising clients to
phobias about positive feelings towards the self is central to achieving these aims. In terms of the triangle of conflict, the defence (D) for these
types of affect phobias is usually self-devaluation and finds expression in self-neglect, self-hate, self-attack and in extreme cases, self-harm.
These defences are used to regulate anxiety, shame, guilt, contempt and disgust (A) concerning experiencing or expressing positive feelings
about the self (F) including self-compassion, self-esteem, self-respect, self-confidence and self-interest.
To elicit positive feelings about the self, invite the client to recount how they have been abused, neglected and hurt during their life. After
each of these stories ask them, "how do you think I feel after hearing that story about how you were hurt/let down/betrayed?" To this, clients
may indicate that they believe you feel sad, concerned, sympathetic and so forth. Confirm this and invite the client to explore their own
feelings of compassion for themselves. For example, "yes, I feel really concerned that when you were a little girl you were hurt so badly. I'm
wondering, if you can allow yourself to experience the same sort of feelings for this little girl?"
Typically clients find these feelings inhibited by their self-devaluing defences and anxiety, shame and disgust. To help clients regulate
these emotions, ask them questions such as, "what is the hardest thing about feeling compassion for this hurt little girl?" A common
response is for clients to say that they believe it is selfish to care for themselves. In response, point out that it is possible to care about
a number of people (including the self) at the same time and that the care we show to others is enhanced if we are able also to care for


ourselves. A second common response is for clients to say that they could not stand the pain it would bring to care for themselves. The
implication is that if clients allow themselves to feel compassion for themselves or joy now, they open themselves up to experiencing the
grief associated with a lifetime of lost opportunities where they have not cared for themselves. In response, assure clients that the grief
will be strong and hurt, but it will pass and create the possibility of experiencing self-compassion and joy in the future. By repeating this
procedure of inviting clients to experience positive feeling about the self through asking them to imagine the compassion you feel for them,
and then preventing them from using self-devaluing defences (D) and regulating their anxiety, shame and contempt (A), they gradually
become desensitised to adaptive positive feelings about the self.
However, they need to replace their self-devaluing defences with positive supports. Invite clients to find role models whom they admire
and can emulate. Invite them to articulate ideally how they would like to be if they could manage their lives in a better way. Help them
to develop problem-solving, communication, assertiveness and self-care skills using the procedures outlined in Chapter 3 on cognitive
behaviour therapy so that they can solve problems in a balanced way rather than through excessive self-sacrifice or self-harm.
Another strategy for self-restructuring is facilitating viewing the self from the perspective of others. Regularly invite clients after they
have recounted significant episodes from their current or past life to imagine how you perceive them, or how others in their social network
might view them. Enquire how they would react if a stranger recounted similar incidents to them. A variation on this is to role-play
recounting the incident with the therapist taking on the role of the stranger and recounting an incident similar to that just recounted by the
client. Invite clients to describe how hearing the incident makes them feel towards the stranger the therapist is role-playing.
A particularly important set of skills to be learned is recognising and responding to personal needs in a compassionate way, so clients
become their own "good parents." Here is a rationale for this intervention. "We know your parents, at least some of the time, did their best
to bring you up, but their best was not enough. Often they were not tuned in to what you needed and so often you were left needing. Now,
as an adult you can change that. You can tune in to your needs and make careful plans for them to be met like a good parent." Coach clients
to become attuned to internal signals such as hunger, thirst, fatigue, danger, sexual arousal, loneliness, recognition, joy and the need for


meaning in life. Help them to develop routines for meeting some of these needs (e.g. hunger and thirst) and to develop longer-term plans to
meet others (the need for friendship) in the way that good parents would be attuned to their children's needs and attempt to meet them in a
responsive way. This intervention is particularly important where clients disregard their own needs excessively or rely almost exclusively on
others for having their needs met. Often this latter adaptation appears as a "relationship addiction" where clients cannot affirm themselves,
but rely exclusively on others to affirm their identities. Self-parenting helps such clients to move towards autonomy, and those who
disregard their own needs to move towards interdependence.
Where clients have a fragile sense of self, repeat self-restructuring interventions until positive self-feelings are no longer avoided, self-
esteem improves and clients have learned to act as their own "good parents."
Other restructuring
The aim of other restructuring is to help clients become receptive to the positive feelings of others towards them, to develop more accurate
and compassionate perceptions of others, and to integrate positive and negative views of others. This involves desensitisation to phobias
about nurturant feelings from others in the client's current life (C), in the therapeutic relationship (T) and in the past (P). Where there is a
phobia about nurturant attachment feelings from others (F), in terms of the triangle of conflict, the defence may be denial, devaluation or
repression (D). With denial, clients do not believe others care about them. With devaluation, clients see the other person in a disparaging
light, and so minimise the validity of their expressions of care. For example, "when he says he loves me, I think he must be a real fool to fall
for a loser like me." With repression, the client keeps memories of positive past attachments unconscious. All of these defences are used to
regulate anxiety and other inhibitory feelings, such as self-disgust (A) that arise at the thought of others caring about them.
To desensitise clients to positive feelings from the therapist (T), begin by giving them the rationale for doing so. "Often if we have been
badly treated in the past, we mistakenly assume that others in our current lives, including friends, partners or therapists will also treat us
badly. So we respond to others as if they care little for us, even when the other person cares a great deal. This habit makes it difficult to form


lasting relationships. One way around it is to learn to recognise and respond positively to caring feelings from other people." Then invite
clients to say how they perceive you, the therapist. This usually elicits transference distortions in which clients typically attribute uncaring
attitudes to the therapist. For example, "you must think I'm such a loser, and you're only listening to me because it is your job." In response to
this, ask the client to look at your face and see if your expression is an uncaring one and to think back over the time you have spent together
and see if there is any evidence that you may actually care for the client. As clients struggle with this, invite them to let you know what the
most painful thing is about admitting that you might care for them. Repeat the process until clients become receptive to positive feelings
from the therapist (T).
To desensitise clients to positive feelings from others in their current life (C), using guided imagery invite them to imagine in detail
increasingly more intense situations in which others express care for them. In each of these imagined scenarios, ask clients to indicate what
the most painful thing is about hearing others' expressions of attachment to them, without using defences such as denial or devaluation.
Repeat the process until clients become receptive to positive feelings from others in their current life.
To desensitise clients to positive feelings from significant carers in their past (P), begin by giving them the rationale for doing so. "Often
if we have been badly hurt or let down by others in the past who were supposed to care for us, we put all memories of positive attachments
to these or other carers out of our mind. We actively try to forget them, because to remember them would hurt us too much. However, if
we can be brave enough to search and find these memories of positive attachments from our childhoods, they can help us. We can use the
memories of the good feelings we had in these childhood relationships as a reminder of the kinds of feelings we would like to have now in
our relationships with friends and partners. These memories are like a map that let us know the kinds of emotions we want to feel when we
make good friends." Then invite them to think about people in their early life who made them feel special, who they looked up to, and who
made them feel safe and secure when they were hurt or lonely. Ask clients to recount in explicit detail episodes in which their carer made
them feel protected, safe or secure. Invite them to visualise these situations vividly. If they experience anxiety about admitting these feelings


to consciousness, ask what the most painful thing is about allowing them to re-experience care and kindness from others. Repeat the process
until clients become receptive to positive feelings from carers in their life (P).
To facilitate more accurate and compassionate perceptions of others in their current life, offer empathy skills training. Invite clients to
role-play situations in which they misperceived others, but to take the role of the other person and the therapist take the role of the client.
After these role-plays ask clients to summarise how the other person might have felt in the situation. Repeat the process using many
different scenarios until the client learns how to accurately and compassionately judge others' feelings and intentions.
Some clients, particularly those with borderline personality disorders who have been abused in childhood, have "addictive" attachments
to others, especially romantic partners, who treat them badly. They repeatedly are attracted to, select and depend on these partners
who are initially charming but ultimately abusive or unfaithful. Such clients find these relationships initially exciting because of these
partners' charms, and attractive because they are familiar and recapitulate similar relationships with abusive carers. But ultimately these
relationships are painful because they end in betrayal. In contrast, such clients find relationships with decent, caring partners boring and
sometimes disgusting. To be able to let go of addictive relationships with uncaring partners, first clients must be desensitised to caring
feelings of others and their own positive feelings about the self. They must also be given the opportunity to grieve the lost opportunities for
caring relationships in the past. The most useful rationale to give clients for this intervention is that lasting and satisfying relationships are
based on generous love of others and not the addictive need for the approval of others. In order to be open to relationships based on generous
love, rather than trapped into relationships based on the addictive need for approval, we have to be able to have positive feelings about
ourselves and recognise and accept positive feelings from others, hence the need for desensitisation to positive feelings from self and others.
Repeat all of these other-restructuring interventions until adaptive feelings within relationships are no longer avoided. This can be a slow
process with people who have personality disorders.
As self and other restructuring progresses, clients become receptive to positive feelings to and from self and others. They gradually move
towards seeing themselves and others more accurately and compassionately. A gradual realisation comes that we all have mixed feelings

about ourselves and others. We all have strengths and weaknesses. We all have achieved some good things in life and we all have made some
unfortunate mistakes. Creating opportunities for clients to articulate this helps them to let go of the defence mechanism of splitting, so
common in borderline personality disorder, and to integrate their positive and negative feelings about themselves and others.
Therapeutic relationship, resistance, transference and countertransference
A distinction is made within the psychodynamic tradition between the transference relationship and the real relationship between the
client and therapist (McCullough-Vaillant, 1997). In the transference relationship, the client responds to the therapist (T) in the way that
they responded to past caregivers (P), following engrained D-A-F patterns. In the real relationship, the therapist and client collaborate in a
relationship based on mutual trust and respect. Both types of relationships occur during BPT, and at any one time one is more prominent
than the other. In long-term psychoanalysis, the therapist creates a context where the transference relationship is given greater expression.
In the approach to BPT described here, the real relationship is given primacy, although transference inevitably occurs and transference
interpretations are made when therapists point out the occurrence of D-A-F patterns within the therapeutic relationship.
Resistance is commonplace in therapy. Resistance involves using various defences (D) to regulate anxiety (A) associated with the threat
of uncovering forbidden feelings (F). In psychodynamic psychotherapy, clients typically become involved in resistance for good reasons.
Resistance is the client's attempt to use defences that were effective in earlier life in ensuring safety, security and survival and avoiding
threats to physical and psychological well-being. Clients may resist practical aspects of the therapeutic contract by making major life
changes, attempting suicide, trying to contact the therapist outside office hours, missing sessions or coming late to sessions. They may
resist procedural aspects of the contract by censoring the material they talk about in therapy; forgetting to tell the therapist about important
material such as significant dreams; consistently rejecting the therapist's interpretations; or demanding that the therapist gratify their
curiosity about the therapist's private life or their desire for erotic contact with the therapist.


Within BPT, the therapist responds to resistance by offering interpretations of the resistance in a supportive rather than punitive way. It
is critical that such interpretations are not offered in a punitive way, because typically in the past clients have met with punitive reactions to
their commonly used defences within the context of intimate or helping relationships.
The therapist's own immediate psychological reactions to the client's resistance is an important source of information about the impact
of the client's defence mechanisms and relational styles on others such as their partners, friends, children or close colleagues. Immediate,
intense psychological reactions to clients are usually referred to as countertransference. In the case example at the beginning of the chapter,
at one point in the treatment the client showed resistance by being overly cooperative. This elicited a countertransference reaction in the
therapist of extreme irritation. This let the therapist know that in certain types of situations this client typically reacted by making people
feel irritated. This information allowed the therapist to make the following interpretation in a supportive way: "it seems that sometimes the
way you go along with the wishes of others without fighting your corner may irritate them and make them place more demands on you,
which in turn makes you go along with them even more. Do you want to explore that possibility?"
Distinctions are made between concordant and complementary countertransference reactions. With concordant countertransference
reactions, the therapist experiences a deep empathy with the client's experience. For example, with a client who has experienced a
major loss, the therapist may experience profound sadness and despair. With complementary countertransference reactions, the therapist
experiences the interpersonal response invited by the client's reaction. For example, in response to the client blaming the therapist for not
alleviating their suffering, the therapist may experience guilt and anger.
When therapists experience countertransference reactions, they are sometimes predominantly reflections of the impact of the client's
typical defences and relational style. However, in other instances they may be predominantly reflections of the therapist's own
unresolved sensitivities to particular issues. For example, a therapist who has experienced child abuse, neglect or early bereavement may
respond particularly intensely to the maladaptive defences and relational styles of a client who has experienced similar trauma. These
predominantly personal countertransference reactions may compromise the therapist's capacity to offer supportive interpretations and

maintain good therapeutic alliance. Therapists may find themselves alternating between attempts to gratify the client's need to be rescued
and attempts to persecute the client for showing resistance. Because countertransference reactions that arise from therapists' personal life
histories can compromise the capacity to respond therapeutically, it is particularly important for clinicians who practise psychodynamic
therapy to receive regular supervision and to have undergone their own psychodynamic therapy. Such personal therapy also enhances
therapists' capacity to empathise with clients' experiences of the challenges entailed by participating as a client in this type of therapy.
Termination
Because BPT is time-limited, therapy is usually terminated when the session limit has been reached. At this point, for the half to two-thirds
of cases that can benefit from this type of therapy, the presenting problems will have been partially but not fully resolved (Svartberg et
al., 2004; Winston et al., 1994). However, clients who responded to BPT will know how to recognise and relinquish defences and will have
become partially desensitised to their main forbidden feelings, so they will have the skills required to independently continue the process
that began in BPT. As the session limit is approached, if significant gains have been made, the interval between sessions can be increased. The
changes in the presenting problems that have occurred may be reviewed and the reasons for these changes in terms of the model given in
Figure 4.1 explored. Successes in reducing symptoms and solving presenting problems may be celebrated. Later sessions may be used to help
clients develop the mature defence of anticipation. Possible situations in which they may be tempted to use old defences may be identified
and more adaptive ways of managing these explored. Part of the process of preparing for future challenges is network building. Therapists
may invite clients to begin to develop networks of relationships that will provide them with support when they face future challenges.
Termination is a loss experience. Clients may be invited to express how they feel about this loss, to grieve it, to articulate their positive and
negative feelings about the therapist and the therapy process, and to anticipate how they will carry an internalisation of the therapist with
them in future. When they meet complex life challenges they can imagine what the therapist might say to them in those situations.

Summary
Brief psychodynamic therapy (BPT) is an evidence-based approach to clinical practice that falls within the psychoanalytic tradition and was
exemplified here with reference to a model of practice originated by David Malan in the UK and further developed by Leigh McCullough in
the US. Within this BPT model it is assumed that psychological problems arise because dysfunctional psychological defence mechanisms
(D) have been used to manage anxiety and inhibitory affects (A) about the expression of potentially adaptive, but forbidden feelings and
impulses (F). These D-A-F patterns are typically long-standing and have begun in childhood through interactions with parents and other
past persons (P). They are maintained by interactions with significant people in the client's current life situation (C) and are re-enacted as
transference with the therapist (T) during the course of therapy, a context within which they can be explored and understood. BPT aims to
help clients recognise and relinquish their dysfunctional defences and replace them with more mature defences. A second aim of BPT is to
desensitise clients to the experience of forbidden feelings and impulses and help them develop adaptive ways to express these. A third aim
of BPT, of particular relevance to clients with personality disorders, is to help them develop a more positive self-image and a capacity to
engage in more positive relationships with others. Within BPT specific therapeutic strategies are used to restructure defences, to restructure
forbidden feelings and affects, and to restructure psychological representations of self and others. BPT begins with an assessment interview
in which suitability for BPT is determined and a formulation is developed. Clients with GAF scores below 50 are unsuitable for all but
the self-other restructuring stages of BPT. Treatment is premised on a time-limited contract and usually progresses from defence to
affect restructuring. However, with low-functioning clients, it begins with self-other restructuring. Within the therapeutic relationship,
transference, countertransference and resistance are managed in a planned way. In the termination phase, the way in which presenting
problems were resolved is reviewed and grief associated with the ending of the therapeutic relationship is addressed.


Exercise
Using the case of Michael from the chapter case study, draw triangles of conflict and person, including his defences, anxieties and feelings in
relation to the therapist and current and past people in his life.
Working in pairs, adopt roles of interviewer and interviewee and reverse roles when the interview is over. Role-play the following therapist
interactions with Michael:
1. Recognise his defences [D]: Help him discover what is defended against [F] and why [A], being mindful to provide empathy and validate
his feelings.
2. Restructure his defences [D] and increase his motivation to give up defences: Help him to:
a. Identify pros and cons of defences
b. Identify primary and secondary gains
c. Identify the origins and maintenance of defences
d. Identify the maladaptive effects of using defences
e. Grieve the losses associated with defence use
f. Identify and work towards using alternative adaptive behaviours or more mature defences.
3. Experience affect: Help him to be exposed in imagination to the forbidden feelings [F], without responding with a defence [D], and
support him in managing the associated anxiety [A] until it subsides.
4. Express affect in "real-life" situations: Help him to:
a. Express emotion and tolerate expressions of emotions by others
b. Deal with interpersonal conflict that may arise

c. Integrate affects for better emotional expression
d. Learn and practise assertiveness skills.
Further reading for practitioners
Crits-Cristoph, P., & Barber, J. (1991). Handbook of Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy. New York: Spectrum.
Malan, D. (1995). Individual Psychotherapy and the Science of Psychodynamics (Second Edition). London: Butterworth-Heinemann.
McCullough, L., Kuhn, N., Andrews, S., Kaplan, A., Wolf, J., & Hurley, C. (2003). Treating Affect Phobia: A Manual for Short Term Dynamic
Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford.
McCullough-Vaillant, L. (1997). Changing Character: Short-Term Anxiety Regulating Psychotherapy for Restructuring Defences, Affects and
Attachments. New York: Basic Books.
Ursano, R., Sonnenberg, S., & Lazar, S. (2004). Concise Guide to Psychodynamic Psychotherapy (Third Edition). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press.
Assessment instruments
Bond, M., & Wesley, S. (1996). Manual for the Defence Style Questionnaire. Montreal Quebec: McGill University. (Write to Dr Michael
Bond, Department of Psychiatry, Sir Mortimer B Davis-Jewish General Hospital, 4333 Chemin De la Cote Ste-Catherine, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, H3T 1E4, Phone 514-3408210.)
McCullough, L. (2003). Achievement of Therapeutic Objectives Scale. Available at http://affectphobiatherapy.com/forms/
McCullough, L. (2003). Psychotherapy Assessment Checklist. Available at http://affectphobiatherapy.com/forms/


Perry, C., & Kardos, M. (1995). A review of defence mechanism rating scales. In H. Conte & R. Plutchik (Eds.), Ego Defences: Theory
and Measurement (pp. 283-299). New York: Wiley. (Contains a description of the Defence Mechanism Rating Scale available from Sir
Mortimer B Davis-Jewish General Hospital, 4333 Chemin De la Cote Ste-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3T 1E4.)
Society for Psychotherapy Research is a good source of information on assessment instruments and research in the field: http://
www.psychotherapyresearch.org
References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-IV-
TR). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA:
Author.
Aveline, M. (1995). How I assess for focal therapy. In C. Mace (Ed.), The Art and Science of Assessment in Psychotherapy (pp. 137-154).
London: Routledge.
Balint, M. (1968). The Basic Fault. Therapeutic Aspects of Regression. London: Tavistock.
Balint, M., Ornstein, O., & Balint, E. (1972). Focal Psychotherapy. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott.
Bond, M., & Wesley, S. (1996). Manual for the Defence Style Questionnaire. Montreal Quebec: McGill University. (Write to Dr Michael Bond,
Department of Psychiatry, Sir Mortimer B Davis-Jewish General Hospital, 4333 Chemin De la Cote Ste-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada, H3T 1E4, Phone 514-3408210.)
Book, H. (1998). Brief Psychodynamic Psychotherapy. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. (2008). Handbook of Attachment (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.


Cramer, P. (1991). The Development of Defence Mechanisms: Theory, Research, and Assessment. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Crits-Cristoph, P., & Barber, J. (1991). Handbook of Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy. New York: Spectrum.
Davanloo, H. (1980). Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy. New York: Jason Aronson.
Ezriel, H. (1952). Notes on psychoanalytic group therapy: II. Interpretation. Research Psychiatry, 15, 119.
Greenberg, L. (2002). Emotion Focused Therapy: Coaching Clients to Work Through Their Feelings. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Greenberg, L. (2010). Emotion Focused Therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Gustafson, J. (1986). The Complex Secret of Brief Psychotherapy. New York: Norton.
Horowitz, M., Marmar, C., Krupnick, J., Wilner, K., Kaltreider, N., & Wallerstein, R. (1984). Personality Styles in Brief Psychotherapy. New
York: Basic Books.
Lambert, M. J. (2013). The efficacy and effectiveness of psychotherapy. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin & Garfield's Handbook of
Psychotherapy and Behaviour Change (Sixth Edition, pp. 169–218). New York: Wiley.
Leichsenring, F., & Klein, S. (2014). Evidence for psychodynamic psychotherapy in specific mental disorders: A systematic review.
Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 28(1), 4-32.
Leichsenring, F., Klein, S., & Salzer, S. (2014). The efficacy of psychodynamic psychotherapy in specific mental disorders: A 2013 update
of empirical evidence. Contemporary Psychoanalysis, 50, 89-130.
Luborsky, L. (1962). Clinicians' Judgements of Mental Health. Archives of General Psychiatry, 7, 407-417.
Luborsky, L. (1984). Principles of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy: A Manual for Supportive/Expressive Treatment. New York: Basic.
Malan, D. (1995). Individual Psychotherapy and the Science of Psychodynamics (Second Edition). London: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Mann, J. (1973). Time-Limited Psychotherapy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McCullough, L. (2003). Psychotherapy Assessment Checklist. Available at http://affectphobiatherapy.com/forms/


McCullough, L., Kuhn, N., Andrews, S., Kaplan, A., Wolf, J., & Hurley, C. (2003). Treating Affect Phobia: A Manual for Short Term Dynamic
Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford.
McCullough-Vaillant, L. (1997). Changing Character: Short-Term Anxiety Regulating Psychotherapy for Restructuring Defences, Affects and
Attachments. New York: Basic Books.
Menninger, K. (1958). Theory of Psychoanalytic Technique. London: Imago.
PDM Taskforce. (2006). Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual. Silver Springs, MD: Alliance of Psychoanalytic Organizations.
Perry, C., & Kardos, M. (1995). A review of defence mechanism rating scales. In H. Conte & R. Plutchik (Eds.), Ego Defences: Theory
and Measurement (pp. 283-299). New York: Wiley. (Contains a description of the Defence Mechanism Rating Scale available from Sir
Mortimer B Davis- Jewish General Hospital, 4333 Chemin De la Cote Ste-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3T 1E4.)
Piper, W., Joyce, A., McCallum, M., Azim, H., & Ogrodniczuk, J. (2002). Interpretive and Supportive Psychotherapies. Matching Therapy and
Personality. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Sifneos, P. (1987). Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy: Evaluation and Technique (Second Edition). New York: Plenum.
Strupp, H., & Binder, J. (1984). Psychotherapy in a New Key: Time-Limited Dynamic Psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
Svartberg, M., Stiles, M., & Seltzer, M. (2004). Randomized controlled trial of the effectiveness of short-term dynamic psychotherapy and
cognitive therapy for cluster C personality disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 810-817.
Ursano, R., Sonnenberg, S., & Lazar, S. (2004). Concise Guide to Psychodynamic Psychotherapy (Third Edition). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press.
Ursano, R., & Ursano, A. (2009). Brief individual psychodynamic psychotherapy. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, & J. Geddes
(Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry (Second Edition, Volume 2, pp. 1327-1337). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vaillant, G. (2000). Adaptive mental mechanisms. Their role in positive psychology. American Psychologist, 55, 89-98.


Winston, A., Laikin, M., Pollack, J., Samstag, L., McCullough, L., & Muran, C. (1994). Short-term psychotherapy of personality disorders:
2 year follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 190–194.


Chapter 5 Emotion-focused therapy
Antonio Pascual-Leone, Cristina A. Andreescu and Leslie S. Greenberg
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-5
Theory of experiential therapy
Emotion-focused therapy (EFT) is a therapeutic approach based on the understanding of emotions and their role in human adaptive and
maladaptive functioning as well as in psychotherapeutic change. EFT was developed on the bases of client-centred, gestalt, experiential,
and existential therapies, informed by modern emotion theory. These experiential/humanistic approaches promote a view of the person as
being capable of awareness, growth and choice. In therapy, the client works towards developing acceptance and understanding of emotion,
with the goals of strengthening the self, regulating affect, and creating new meanings about the self and the world (Pascual-Leone et al., in
press).
EFT is based on a set of core humanistic values which foster growth. Our understanding of these values has been updated in light
of contemporary emotion theory (Frijda, 1986; Greenberg, 2002; Greenberg & Safran, 1987) and dialectical constructivism (Elliott &
Greenberg, 1997; Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1995). The first core value of EFT is experiencing. This involves the continually evolving,

dynamic synthesis of perception, memory, emotion, sensation, behaviour, conceptual thought and meaning creating the experience of a
particular moment. Experiencing is viewed as the entry point into the person's lived reality and a gateway for therapeutic change. Second,
EFT promotes the presence and authenticity of the therapist-client relationship, which allows for a deepening of the experience and
emergence of new meanings. A third value is that of the client's potential for agency and self-determination. Clients are treated as active
participants in their change process, exploring and mastering adaptive choices during therapy. The fourth value of EFT is that human
beings function best as integrated pluralities. Wholeness and diversity imply that human beings are made up of many self-organizations,
each associated with its own set of self-experiences. However, only the coherent and integrated understanding of all these parts and their
interrelationship allows for the best functioning of the person. Lastly, EFT considers that growth and development are adaptive lifelong
processes. In supportive environments, innate curiosity and experiencing will allow the person to evolve a differentiated and flexible
capacity to adapt to life goals and challenges.
Emotion theory: the purpose of feeling
The major theoretical foundation of the emotion-focused approach is the bioevolutionary theory of emotion, which is informed by a
constructivist view of how personal meaning is created (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Greenberg & Safran, 1987, 1989; Greenberg & van Balen,
1998). This theory postulates that emotions are fundamentally an adaptive system, connected to our most essential needs, geared towards
alerting us to situations important to our well-being, and tacitly informing a course of action towards meeting these needs. As such,
emotions set a basic mode of processing in action (Greenberg, 2002; LeDoux, 1996). The person is born with a hardwired emotionally based
meaning system as well as the ability to learn and formulate meaning on a cognitive level. Therefore, meaning is constructed by synthesizing
information received from these two processing systems, each leading to distinct subjective experiences: the experiential/schematic system
and the conceptual/reflexive system. This duality is evidenced in two different neurochemical and physiological pathways of emotion

processing (LeDoux, 1996; Pessoa, 2013). In the experiential system, the shorter and faster amygdala pathway sends automatic emergency
signals to brain and body, and produces gut responses. In the conceptual system, a longer and slower neocortex pathway produces thought-
mediated emotions. This dual-path system developed because clearly it was adaptive to respond quickly in some situations, but at other
times better functioning resulted from the integration of cognition into emotional response (Greenberg, 2010). In facilitating therapeutic
change, it becomes more effective to activate these stronger emotions by accessing the experiential system and attending to its adaptive
information or restructuring it when maladaptive.
Dialectical construction of the experiencing of self
Emotional processing is a complex dialectical process that integrates multiple processes and multiple levels of functioning (Greenberg,
2011; Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 2001; Greenberg & Watson, 2006). This synthesis of multiple schemes forms the basis of our current self-
organizations at any one moment and provides the bodily felt referent of experience to which one needs to attend in order to experience
oneself (Greenberg, 2010; Greenberg et al., 2014).
The basic level of functioning is a pre-reflective reaction which entails the perception of a stimulus, with preconscious cognitive and
affective processing and the accompanying physiological changes. Over time, learning, development, and cultural practices shape this
reaction, organizing it into emotion schemes that become the basis of experience. The tacit organization of these emotion schemes is
accompanied by "the feeling of what happens" (Damasio, 1999) representing the bodily sense of who the person is, the awareness of their
being. Further symbolization of the person's experience leads to the creating of meaning. Meaning, narrative and identity are constructed
by reflecting on and explaining experience in an ongoing dialectical interaction between symbol and bodily felt experience (Gendlin, 1964,
1996).
The dialectic constructivist view of the self entails a constant dialogue between implicit and explicit processes, where the latter interprets
and creates meaning out of the former. The constructivist perspective postulates that our knowledge of an object is constructed by

successive approximations to it rather than being able to know it directly. In relation to the individual, this means that we simultaneously
create and discover who we are and what we feel in the moment. The dialectical aspect of this theory refers to the ongoing and
systematic process by which the brain resolves contradictions. The dialectical constructivist view argues that constraints of reality limit
our constructions and influence the meaning we create and what we come to know. As such, it appears that our sense of self allows for a
compromise between relativism ("anything goes") and realism ("nothing but the facts"). In the end, while not all constructions will reflect
or fit the data well, there may be multiple constructions of the same experiences that reach validity (Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1995).
Greenberg (2011) gives the example of a client experiencing low energy after a flight who may symbolize this state as tired, jet-lagged,
depressed, despairing, hopeless or suicidal. All of these symbolizations fit, to some degree, with the embodied experience - much better than
would labelling the state as, say, happy or angry, but how the experience is labelled will influence the client's next moment of experience.
Self-organizations are continually constructed and reconstructed (Greenberg & Pascual- Leone, 1995, 1997, 2001; Whelton & Greenberg,
2001). Stable self-structures appear because people regularly recreate these states out of the same basic component elements as they
interact with their situation, with some states acting as attractors in the dynamic synthesis process. This makes self-states idiosyncratic
and variable, both across people and within the same person over time, and also provides an optimistic view of the possibilities for change
(Greenberg, 2011).
Emotion schemes: psychological units that orient and organize the client
Emotion schemes constitute the basic unit of the adult emotional response system. These are internal structures synthesizing affective,
motivational, cognitive and behavioural elements into internal organizations and are activated rapidly, out of awareness, by relevant cues
(Greenberg, 2011). As noted earlier, the emotional brain's hardwired responses serve to inform a person of internal experience and external
surroundings. During the healthy lifespan of a person, these emotional responses further develop via learning experiences and cultural
influences. The emotional memories of lived emotional experiences form emotion schemes (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Greenberg et al.,

1993; Oatley, 1992). Healthy schemes may be the result of parents validating a child's emotional reaction, and parental coaching in helping
one attend to and handle these emotions. These schemes promote efficacy and resiliency in dealing with future situations, as the individual
will know to feel danger, set boundaries and self-soothe effectively.
The formation of emotion schemes involves networks of emotions connected to memories of the self in given situations. Hebb (1949),
an early neuropsychologist, offered a rule of neural functioning: "Neurons that fire together wire together," and they continue to fire
together. When neurons are concurrently activated, the strength of the transmission between them grows. Research shows that highly
intense emotional experiences are "burned into memory." The more highly aroused the emotion, the stronger the memory that forms. As
such, schemes are idiosyncratic, based on the person's past emotional learning, and can be thought of as being stored at emotion addresses
(Greenberg, 2010). Thus, the memories of sadness-producing experiences are stored at a sadness address. A similar process occurs with
anger or fear. Emotion schematic memories are activated by the emotion cues around which they were formed a physical or imaginary
stimulus. Once activated, these schemes generate an emotional response, with its associated motivation to act plus rudimentary forms of
cognitive processing, like the focusing of attention. Once this basic mode of processing has been activated, the person processes information
more consciously, ultimately going on to symbolize the appraised situation in words before eventually generating ways of coping with
it. The important issue is that the emotionally motivated, basic mode of processing activated by schemes occurs out of awareness and
influences conscious processing (Greenberg, 2011).
Emotion schemes consists of several elements: (1) an affective component with bodily/expressive elements including immediate
sensations within the body (e.g. a knotted feeling in the gut) and expression of the emotion (e.g. a fearful facial expression); (2) a behavioural
component (e.g. an action tendency to run away in fear); (3) a cognitive symbolic/conceptual representations in the form of verbal
statements (e.g. "this is dangerous") or non-verbal representations (e.g. an image of being attacked); and (4) the motivational component in
the form of desires, needs, wishes and intentions (e.g. to be safe from attack) (Greenberg, 2011; Pascual-Leone et al., in press).


Emotional schemes begin forming in childhood, as caregivers repeatedly provide validation to a child's emotional experience and coach
that child through self-soothing and coping strategies. One's repertoire of emotional schemes also continues to develop into adulthood.
When responses from the environment (e.g. from caregivers) are less optimal, the core emotional schemes may become maladaptive as the
individual tries to organize themselves so as to cope both with negative emotion as well as with the caregiver's non-optimal response. For
example, growing up in a family that does not display anger or discuss boundary violations may lead to a secondary maladaptive emotion
scheme that suppresses healthy anger.
Changing maladaptive emotion schemes is the ultimate target of intervention in therapy. When opposing schemes are co-activated,
compatible elements synthesize to form new higher-order schemes. Just as "standing" and "falling" in a toddler can be dynamically
synthesized into a higher-order scheme for "walking," through a dialectical process (Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1995), schemes of different
emotional states can be synthesized to form new integrations. Thus, a schematic emotional memory of fear from prior abuse can be
synthesized with empowering anger which motivates approach rather than withdrawal into a new sense of confidence (Paivio & Pascual-
Leone, 2010). In order to achieve this process, emotion schemes are elicited and examined in therapy (Greenberg, 2011). By reflecting on
our reactions in a situation, referring to the bodily felt sense of it, symbolizing our behaviours and thoughts, and forming a more coherent
narrative, we construct our sense of self, simultaneously discovering and creating who we are (Greenberg & Watson, 2006; Pascual-Leone
& Greenberg, 2006). The therapist helps the transformation of these emotion schemes through careful empathic listening and the use of
evocative and expressive interventions, supporting the client to re-experience emotions and schematic memories, and to build adaptive
emotional responses (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997).
Types of emotions: a categorization with implications for psychotherapy
Emotion schemes can be organized into four distinct classes of emotional responses (Greenberg & Safran, 1987): one is productive and
adaptive, while each of the other three are maladaptive or unproductive (Greenberg et al., 1993; Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Greenberg &

Safran, 1987). These will be described in turn.
Primary adaptive emotions
Primary adaptive emotions include productive, meaning-laden and idiosyncratically specific affective experiences. Discrete emotions (e.g.
sadness at loss, fear at threat, happiness at positive events) inform the person about what is significant in their experience. These are the
emotions for which adaptive value is clear. Their evocation accesses and mobilizes adaptive information, often embodied in some action
tendency. Complex feelings or experiencing make up the second type of primary adaptive emotion. Originating from bodily felt sensations,
these emotions provide a complex sense of (preverbal) meaning, integrating feelings with perception and cognition. Here people may not
feel the clarity of anger at violation, or sadness at loss, but rather a rich complexity of felt meaning, as in a sense of being "all washed up."
This felt sense should be explored in order to access the implicit meaning and attain a bodily felt release relating to emergent meanings. The
third type of primary adaptive emotion is that of emotional pain, which is a diffuse, holistic system response that informs the whole sense of
self of an injury. The person here will feel broken or shattered (Bolger, 1996) and will need to re-experience, reprocess, and attain a sense of
self-wholeness during therapy.
Primary maladaptive emotions
These unhealthy primary emotional experiences have become dysfunctional through a person's developmental history of neglect, abuse
or invalidation. These responses may have been initially adaptive given the person's environment at a certain time, such as learning to
fear closeness because it was associated with abuse. These responses become maladaptive as the person matures and reacts to normal
(i.e. potentially healthy) social interactions in this old, learned manner. Generally, fear and shame are the primary maladaptive emotions
that occur most often in therapy (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Pascual-Leone & Greenberg, 2007). Core maladaptive self-schemes are the

shamebased sense of self as worthless or a failure, a sense of "bad me"; or the fear-based sense of feeling fundamentally insecure or anxious,
associated with the experience of "weak me" (Greenberg & Elliott, 2007).
Secondary emotional responses
Secondary emotions are feelings in reaction to identifiable, primary emotional or cognitive processes. Initial emotions brought up in therapy
such as sadness, helplessness, hopelessness and anxiety are usually secondary emotions. Examples include secondary anger as a defensive
reaction to feeling hurt, secondary sadness, or even guilt as a coping reaction to feeling angry.
Secondary emotions occur as a result of a primary emotion not being symbolized in awareness and taking another form to be expressed.
Unsymbolized anger turns into frustrated sadness, fear into coolness, jealousy into anger. Also, people have feelings about their initial
feelings, such as guilt in reaction to one's emerging anger. Sometimes distress is too global and undifferentiated. It may involve high
arousal and low meaningfulness. These emotional responses need to be elaborated into something meaningful and specific, anchored in the
presenting experience. Therapists need to learn to distinguish secondary from primary emotions so that intervention will aim to move past
secondary feelings and work with more primary and productive emotional experiences.
Instrumental emotions
Emotions can also be used instrumentally. This often involves learned behaviours used to obtain a desired functional effect on others.
Emotions are used to manipulate and influence others (e.g. expressing anger in order to dominate, crying in order to elicit sympathy).
However, these emotions do not inform one about the personal significance of an event. Instrumental emotions may be "real" feelings, but
they are the product of operant conditioning and they offer the experiencer neither adaptive information nor potential courses of action for
working through emotional difficulties (Pascual-Leone et al., 2013). The goal in working with instrumental emotions is for clients to become
aware of their role and either abandon them or learn new ways of attaining the same goal.

In conclusion, not all emotional expressions are the same, and so different kinds of emotional reactions require different therapeutic
interventions (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Greenberg & Safran, 1989; Pascual-Leone et al., in press). Assessing these different emotion
processes requires close empathic attunement to the nuances of the client's expression and experience (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997).
View of dysfunction: a framework for understanding emotional problems
EFT promotes an individualized view of dysfunction, such that a therapist works with the client's presenting experience to identify
idiosyncratic factors determining and maintaining the client's difficulties. From an EFT perspective, dysfunction does not arise from one
emotion mechanism alone, but rather through a range of possible routes. Seven types of emotional difficulties combine to result in a
wide range of presenting problems and psychological disorders (Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 2006; Pascual-Leone et al., in press). These are
detailed next.
Lack of emotion awareness
Alexithymia refers to having "no words for feelings" (Taylor & Bagby, 2013). People with alexithymia have an inability to symbolize their
bodily felt sense experience in awareness (e.g. a person may be unable to symbolize increasing tension in his or her body as a sign of anger).
Alternately, adaptive emotional responses are sometimes concealed by secondary emotional responses (e.g. exhibiting anger and dominance
to conceal fear). This common phenomenon deprives the person of valuable, adaptive information regarding unmet needs and potential
plans of action. Lack of awareness of assertive anger or blocked grief underlies depression, while unprocessed shame and fear may lead to
worry and anxiety.
This dysfunction originates from the disowning and disembodiment of the emotion - deemed unacceptable to the self and as not
belonging to or coming from the self. These disembodied emotions may not be all pathogenic; some are potentially adaptive. Healthy
needs for connection or boundary protection may be as equally likely to be disowned as unhealthy shame or traumatic fear. Dysfunction

arises from the disowning of healthy growth-oriented resources and needs, the suppression of unacceptable aspects of experience and the
avoidance of painful emotions. Therefore, therapy with people with alexithymia must focus on helping them to become aware of and own
adaptive, growth-oriented emotional responses while reprocessing painful material.
Maladaptive emotional responses and schemes
Another major problem is the activation of maladaptive emotion schemes. In cases of childhood abuse, parents are a contradictory source of
safety and comfort as well as of hurt, fear and humiliation. The inability to be consistently protected or soothed by one's caretaker results in
a pervasive sense of despair, helplessness and hopelessness, and a sense of being unlovable, bad, defective or worthless.
In adulthood, the fear of closeness and avoidance of interpersonal contact that protected a person from maladaptive situations during
childhood is no longer a source of adaptive coping in the context of current interpersonal relationships. As past abuse continues to taint
present experiences, the adaptiveness of the old response is lost. Dysfunction occurs when the person's self-organization (deemed bad, weak,
unlovable) is triggered by current interactions, or when it becomes the predominant self-organization. In the context of perceived failure
or interpersonal ruptures, the person will experience shame, fear and sadness originating from developmental experiences. The person will
cope by engaging in formerly adaptive but currently maladaptive patterns of withdrawing, which further strengthens the dysfunctional
triggers.
Emotion dysregulation
With under- or over-regulation of emotions, the person is either overwhelmed by emotional experience or becomes numb and distant.
Depression, anxiety, substance misuse or eating disorders reflect dysfunctional regulation of emotional states.
One source of emotion dysregulation involves the lack of empathic attunement from caretakers such as in the case of childhood neglect
and maltreatment. As the caretakers were unable to regulate their own affect appropriately, either by restricting emotional expression or

by exhibiting explosive outbursts, the child did not internalize appropriate emotion regulatory strategies. As an adult, the person's pain is
experienced as either feeling overwhelmed or feeling disconnected from emotional life.
A second source of emotion dysregulation is intense negative emotional experiences such as loss or humiliation, in the absence of support,
validation or soothing. Similarly, early traumatic experiences in the absence of support are associated with strong negative feelings such
as violation, fear, isolation and powerlessness. People will often try to avoid such strong emotions, which are perceived as dangerous, by
suppressing them. In the long term this may result in emotional numbing characteristic of complex post-traumatic symptomatology.
Maladaptive attempts to contain emotion
Emotional over-arousal often results in clients trying desperately to contain their feelings. Trying to avoid emotions entirely may lead to
rebound effects, including emotional flooding. In addition, excessive control of emotion may lead the person to engage in impulsive actions
in response to the overly strict self-control (e.g. excessively eat, drink, spend or have risky sex; Greenberg, 2011).
Conflicts within the self
Conflicts between the various self-organizations can lead to a lack of self-integration. For example, a person may experience an approach-
avoid conflict between wishing to be close while also being afraid and wanting to protect against getting hurt. Alternately people may shift
between love and hate towards the same person in ways that are problematic for the self or for relationships.
Unresolved emotional conflicts with others
Interpersonal difficulties and personality disorders that are related to an extensive history of repeated, traumatic relational disappointments
often represent unresolved emotional conflicts, and the notion of "unfinished business" is intuitive to many clients. The person
develops core maladaptive schemes which overlap with unresolved feelings and unmet needs towards significant others from these past

relationships. The person will often feel abandoned, lost, neglected, humiliated, invalidated or abused. This interpersonal unfinished
business may affect current interpersonal interactions.
Problems in narrative construction
Trauma and narratives of personal or relational failure perpetuate distress. Current events trigger past maladaptive emotional schemes.
These prevent the appropriate processing of events in the present. In EFT, by creating new meaning, the problematic narratives can be
altered as the person finds purpose and redefines his or her role or the role of others. Narratives can change from disempowerment and
victimization to agency and assertiveness, allowing the person to access healthy functioning and to cope with existential issues of death,
loss and isolation.
General guidelines for doing emotion-focused therapy
Goals and principles of EFT
Experiential therapies are organized on the premise that optimal functioning requires the person to be aware not only of one's explicit
thoughts and feelings but also of one's implicit functioning. Automatic reactions to real-time events provide information essential to
adaptive functioning. Therapy helps the client reach a deeper experience and awareness of his or her emotional reactions. Clients are
encouraged to approach, attend to, explore and construct new meaning from their experiences, formulating new self-narratives and
informing future behaviours. By reaching a greater self-understanding, the person gains personal integration and self-coherence.
Treatment goals: content versus process
A distinction is made in experiential therapy between content and process goals. Content goals are usually formulated by the client, and

include the issue that brings them into therapy. These goals remain a pivotal element in the unfolding of treatment, given the humanistic
goal of supporting the client's agency and self-determination and their involvement in their own change process. The chief process goal is
to deepen the client's experiencing and build a sense of self-determination by teaching the client to use his or her experience as a constant
touchstone for what is true and important. As such, treatment is customized to the client's own goals and narratives, while the therapist
empathically helps the client deepen his or her experience.
Treatment principles: the relationship versus tasks
Keeping these two general goals in mind, EFT interventions operate on two major treatment principles: the provision of a therapeutic
relationship and the facilitation of therapeutic work (Greenberg et al., 1993).
Aspects of the therapeutic relationship
The therapeutic relationship in EFT is based on the humanistic principles of offering genuine support, empathic attunement, full and
respectful presence, and being sensitive to the client's experience.
Empathic attunement
This involves being fully present, entering the client's internal frame of reference, and tracking the client's immediate and evolving
experience. Aside from the assessment of psychopathology, the therapist essentially evaluates the client's message for truthfulness and
appropriateness. There is no attempt to interpret patterns, drives, or defences, or to challenge irrational beliefs (Greenberg & Elliott, 2007).
Therapeutic bond
Creating a secure bond is understood to be a key curative element (Rogers, 1957). The therapist seeks to be genuine, empathic, caring and

warm, and to communicate this to the client. This attitude of consistent and noncritical interest aims to show tolerance for all aspects of
the client (Rogers, 1957) while also caring for, affirming and appreciating the client, especially at moments of client vulnerability (Greenberg
et al., 1993; Greenberg & Elliott, 2007). This connection encourages a client to be open and take certain risks for change, and helps to break
down the client's sense of isolation (May & Yalom, 1989).
Task collaboration
This refers to the mutual involvement in both tasks and goals of therapy (Bordin, 1979). The therapist works actively with the client to
describe underlying emotional processes involved in the presenting problem and determine a plan of action (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997).
The therapist's empathy and acceptance not only promote self-acceptance in the client but also offer a role model for affective regulation.
A relationship with an attuned, responsive, mirroring therapist can help clients regulate their overwhelming, painful emotion. Over time
the interpersonal regulation of affect becomes internalized into self-soothing and the capacity to regulate inner states (Greenberg et al.,
2014; Stern, 1985). The therapist also creates a mutually collaborative relationship wherein the underlying message is that "the two of us are
working together to overcome this problem." Thus, on the one hand the client breaks through the sense of aloneness and isolation, and on
the other feels empowered to explore painful aspects of their life in an effort to resolve the pain.
Aspects of therapeutic work in EFT
In addition to the three relationship principles just noted, EFT treatments also rely on three task principles. These are based on the general
assumption that human beings are agentic, purposeful organisms with an innate need for exploration and mastery of their internal and
external worlds (Greenberg et al., 2014).


Experiential processing
We refer to different ways of working as "modes of engagement" (e.g. experiential search, active expression, reflection, interpersonal
contact), and EFT therapists help their clients work differently at different times. The therapist continually uses "markers" to make moment-
by-moment "process diagnoses" of a client's mode of engagement. Furthermore, they determine the most likely process to be optimal at any
given moment in therapy.
Task completion
Research has consistently observed that clients who resolve key therapeutic tasks achieve better outcomes (Greenberg et al., 1994; Watson
& Greenberg, 1996). Specific treatment goals are defined at the beginning of therapy and the therapist helps track progression towards these
goals within each session. Helping the client stay on track, reassessing goals and offering the client a view of this unfolding progress is how
therapists maintain a focus on the completion of tasks (Greenberg & Elliott, 2007).
Self-development
Therapists support a client's potential for self-determination, mature interdependence, and mastery by helping their clients explore the
horizons of newly emerging experience. Clients are often encouraged to make their own in-session decisions, determining the goals, tasks
and activities of therapy. The essential aim here is to foster client responsibility and empowerment (Greenberg & Elliott, 2007).
Therapeutic work involves suggesting experiments (e.g. "Try this" followed by "What do you experience?"). Experiments in EFT facilitate
experiencing through the articulation and explication of implicit feelings and meanings, the acceptance and transformation of painful
unresolved emotions. The work of therapy is not aimed directly at a goal of coping, changing or fixing but rather at the process of allowing


and accepting. Change comes first by acceptance and then eventually by moving on rather than by direct efforts to deliberately change or
achieve a specific goal (Greenberg et al., 2014).
Assessment and case formulation
Humanistic therapies traditionally viewed formal diagnoses as creating an unnecessary imbalance in the therapeutic relationship and as
conveying the idea that the therapist is an expert, not only of dysfunction but also of the client's experience itself (Rogers, 1957). This can
interfere with the formation of a therapeutic relationship conducive to helping a client explore the subjective nature of his or her experience.
As an alternative to this position, case formulation is redefined in EFT as an ongoing process in which client and therapist collaborate as
equals (Goldman & Greenberg, 1995, 1997; Greenberg et al., 1993). The initial sessions establish the fit between client and experiential
treatment. If biological factors or systemic factors better explain the presenting issue, clients are referred for more appropriate treatment.
EFT is not suitable for clients with schizoid, borderline or antisocial personality traits. Knowledge of specific nosologic categories is used as
a guide to identify potential difficulties but not as a description of types of clients. Standardized interviews are not used. In the first few
sessions therapists establish a therapeutic relationship with the clients as they empathically gather information about the client's relevant
life circumstances and presenting problems. The therapist focuses on following the client's process and identifying core painful experiences.
Case formulation is a co-constructive process that is focused on underlying determinants of a presenting problem. The focus of therapy
is constantly informed and shaped by new material as it emerges in sessions. In this way, the formulation originates from the dialogue
between client and therapist and in essence represents a deeper shared understanding of the client's suffering and how to work with it
(Greenberg & Elliott, 2007).


Intervention framework
As noted already, the primary element for therapeutic work is establishing a supportive and productive therapeutic relationship. It is important
that the therapist sees him- or herself as a potential agent in strengthening the client's sense of self. This is accomplished through empathic
attunement, interpersonal soothing to regulate distress and providing a corrective relational experience.
As the client discloses his or her experience, the therapist empathically follows the client's story and encourages him or her to
focus inward, attending to the concomitant feelings. Various types of empathic reflections are used: responses that are purely about
understanding, responses that are validating and evocative, and exploratory or conjectural responses (Greenberg & Elliott, 1997). However,
the fundamental mode of intervention in EFT is one of empathic exploration. By sensitively attending to what is most poignant in the client's
spoken and non-verbal narrative, a therapist's verbal exploration can sometimes help capture the client's experience even more richly than
their own descriptions (Rice, 1974). This helps the client symbolize previously implicit experience and bring it consciously to awareness
(Greenberg, 2011).
The two major efforts in EFT are to help clients with too little access to emotion to open their experience, and to help clients with too
much emotion to contain it. In the first case, the therapist employs a range of techniques to help a client access suppressed feelings. With
these clients who have become emotionally numb, therapists draw attention to bodily sensations that cue emotion, using past emotional
episodes to bring up emotion (Greenberg & Korman, 1993), or use vivid, affectively charged cues such as poignant words or images (Rice,
1974). Therapists may ask clients to engage in an action usually associated with an emotion (e.g. shake one's fist to show anger; raise one's
voice when expressing the anger).
In helping clients down-regulate overwhelming emotions, a therapist may teach the client adaptive strategies for containing emotion.
Suppressing emotions generates more unwanted emotional intrusions, sometimes leading to overwhelming emotional arousal (Kennedy-

(Moore & Watson, 1999). As such, a client must first learn to be aware of his or her emotional experience, as well as how to regulate when
its intensity becomes too much to bear. The client will learn to seek others' support and to engage in self-soothing. The therapist may help
highly distressed clients with relaxation exercises, self-comforting and self-care (Greenberg, 2011).
While these intervention guidelines refer to the general framework of therapy, EFT provides suggestions for working with specific types
of emotion. For instance, primary adaptive emotions are encouraged, as they provide information and action tendencies. The therapist will
provide empathic responding and will act as a "surrogate processor" of the information. The therapist offers versions of meaning and
symbols of emotions that the client then checks against his or her own experience and adopts if appropriate. Over time, clients internalize
this manner of processing and become capable of accessing and identifying their own emotions. In the case of maladaptive primary
emotions, a therapist helps the client approach, regulate and explore these emotions. The goal is to stop avoiding these painful emotions,
and instead to make sense of them and replace them with an adaptive underlying emotion. In approaching secondary emotions, clients learn
to explore those feelings and reach deeper towards underlying primary emotions. As such, the therapist will acknowledge anger, but will
also explore the underlying primary emotion, such as shame. Finally, instrumental emotions are also a source of information regarding one's
interpersonal functioning. A therapist will help clients become aware of the impact emotion has on others and discuss this in terms of the
client's intention. Later work may focus on discontinuing the use of instrumental emotion and finding more adaptive strategies to meet the
client's needs.

Principles of therapeutic work: working with emotion
There are five major principles of emotional change in EFT. These will be discussed in turn.
Increased awareness
Awareness of emotion is the most fundamental principle in EFT. Awareness does not involve just thinking about a feeling, but rather feeling

the feeling in awareness and accepting it. Disowned, disclaimed or split-off emotions are not amenable to change. Knowing what one feels
allows the person to access adaptive information about needs and goals, as well as action tendencies for meeting them (Lieberman et al.,
2004; Pascual-Leone & Greenberg, 2006).
Therapy helps the client approach, tolerate and accept emotions instead of avoiding them. Therapists model approaching and valuing
emotion by empathically attuning to clients' experiences and avoiding theoretical talk and external narratives. The client learns that
emotion is important and acceptable and starts to attend inwardly to their experience.
Emotional expression
Emotional arousal and expression has been shown to be a unique aspect of emotional processing that predicts successful adjustment to
intrapersonal and interpersonal difficulties (Foa & Jaycox, 1999; Greenberg & Malcolm, 2002; Paivio & Nieuwenhuis, 2001; Stanton et al.,
2000). In this context emotional expression does not involve venting of secondary emotions, but rather overcoming avoidance and self-
inhibition, and expressing primary emotions that have been previously disowned.
Avoidance of painful emotions is a strong human tendency. Normal cognitive processes can transform adaptive but unpleasant
emotions, like grief or angry assertiveness, into dysfunctional behaviours in efforts to avoid the feeling. Clients overcome this avoidance
by approaching and tolerating emotions in small steps, within the safety of therapy. These two steps of approaching and tolerating are
consistent with the notions of enduring exposure to previously avoided feelings and the line of evidence supporting it (Foa & Jaycox, 1999).
From the perspective of EFT, exposure is necessary but not sufficient for change (see Paivio & Pascual-Leone, 2010). Rather than emotional
arousal being the only critical variable, EFT research has shown the degree of "emotional productivity" and meaning making during the
aroused experience is what distinguishes good from poor outcome cases (Greenberg et al., 2007). So, from our perspective, the integration of
cognition and aroused affect is what leads to optimum emotional processing (Greenberg, 2002; Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1995). In short,

clients must make contact with their feelings, but then also cognitively orient to, explore and make sense of that experience as a source of
information (Greenberg, 2010).
Emotion regulation and self-soothing
Managing emotional intensity is often a prerequisite for deeper emotional work. Excessive emotional arousal is not always helpful in therapy
or life. Some clients need to learn to down-regulate emotions, especially when distress is so high that emotion no longer informs adaptive
action (Pascual-Leone & Greenberg, 2007). Emotions that require down-regulation are generally secondary emotions (despair, hopelessness)
or primary maladaptive emotions (shame of being worthless, traumatic fear, panic).
One part of helping clients learn emotion regulation is the provision of a safe, calming, validating and empathic environment (Bohart
& Greenberg, 1997). A complementary component of emotion regulation is validating emotions while also teaching emotion coping and
distress tolerance skills (see Linehan, 1993). Following the therapist's modelling in session, the client learns to get some distance from
overwhelming despair and internalizes soothing behaviours, regulating feelings on his or her own, automatically and implicitly (Sroufe,
1996; Stern, 1985). Emotion regulation skills involve identifying and labelling emotions, establishing a working distance, increasing
positive emotions, reducing vulnerability to negative emotions, self-soothing and distraction.
Forms of meditative practice that involve breathing and observing one's emotions from a position of detachment, and accepting that
they come and go, can be helpful in achieving a working distance from overwhelming primary emotion (Greenberg, 2010). Mindfulness
treatments have independently been shown to be effective for treating generalized anxiety disorders and panic (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1992),
chronic pain (Kabat-Zinn et al., 1986) and prevention of relapse in depression (Teasdale et al., 2000). Mindful awareness of emotions coupled
with attending to one's breath is helpful in regulating symptoms of depression and anxiety and enhances coping.
Agentic self-soothing offers another approach to emotion regulation. This involves generating self-compassion. As one accepts and
attends to emerging painful emotional experience, clients may respond to themselves with positive self-talk (Greenberg, 2010). Thus, the

soothing of emotion can be provided by individuals themselves, reflexively, by developing self-empathy and compassionately attending to
their needs (Pascual-Leone & Greenberg, 2007). Soothing also comes interpersonally in the form of a therapist's empathic attunement to
client affect and through acceptance and validation in dialogue.
Reflection on emotional processes
Reflection helps clients create new meaning and develop new narratives to understand their experience (Goldman et al., 2005; Greenberg &
Angus, 2004; Greenberg & Pascual-Leone, 1997). Writing about emotional experience has positive effects on the activity of one's autonomic
nervous system, immune functioning, and physical and emotional health (Frattaroli, 2006; Pennebaker, 1995). This body of research
concludes that individuals are able to organize, structure, and ultimately assimilate their emotional experiences through language and the
construction of story.
As clients reflect on the meaning of situations that evoked strong emotional reactions, they develop deepened self-knowledge. As the
unsayable is made sayable, difficult situations are understood in new ways, old experiences are reframed, and the client comes to see the self,
others and the world in a new way (Greenberg, 2010).
Transformation of emotion by emotion
The concept of transformation of emotion by emotion applies mostly to the transformation of primary maladaptive emotions by activating
more adaptive emotional states (Greenberg, 2002, 2010). This implies that withdrawal emotions can be changed by accessing either
adaptive emotions of empowering anger to promote setting boundaries and overcoming obstacles, or emotions of grief and self-compassion
to promote contact-seeking and self-soothing (Pascual-Leone & Greenberg, 2007).
EFT works on the basic principle that people "must first arrive at a place before they can leave it" (Greenberg, 2002, 2010). The process of
emotional transformation requires the client to become aware and then process the maladaptive emotion by using a more adaptive emotion.


Over time, the co-activation of more adaptive emotion along with, or in response to, the presenting maladaptive emotion helps to gradually
transform maladaptive emotion. This process is different from exposure to feared cues, or attaining insight, and it goes beyond the ideas
of catharsis, habituation or detachment. Here, feeling is not purged or attenuated, but replaced or transformed by another more adaptive
emotion.
The first step is always to explore feelings and differentiate their meaning, working from any secondary to more primary emotions.
However, the question remains: what to do if the primary emotion is maladaptive? One of the key steps in EFT is for the therapist to help
clients access new adaptive emotions, particularly at these critical moments. EFT therapists attend to emotions that are currently being
expressed just on the periphery of a client's awareness. When confronted with a difficult situation, a client has a range of feelings at any
given moment, and some of these emotions are subdominant, although present. An EFT therapist helps the client attend to, and experience,
the adaptive emotions that otherwise would remain on the periphery. Other methods of accessing and evoking new emotions include using
enactment and imagery, remembering a previous time an emotion was felt, changing how the client views things, or even expressing a key
emotion on behalf of the client (Greenberg, 2002; Greenberg et al., 2008). This will often involve activating opposing emotions; for example,
the action tendency of shame is to hide and "shrink into the ground" but this can be transformed through newly accessed anger at violation,
which has one thrust forward one's chest in self-assertion. Thus, once activated, maladaptive shame can be transformed by accessing both
anger at violation and empowered self-compassion, which promotes pride and self-worth. Similarly, maladaptive fear can be transformed
by the activation of adaptive anger or disgust (these emotions establish boundaries), or alternatively through self-compassion (evoking
softer feelings). Maladaptive anger can be undone by vulnerable emotions, either by accessing adaptive sadness or by acknowledging any
feelings of fear and shame (which may still be maladaptive) and then moving on again to adaptive sadness and self-compassion. Withdrawal
emotions from one side of the brain are transformed by approach emotions from another part of the brain or vice versa (Davidson, 2000).
This enables the person to change maladaptive emotions and weaken the hold of associated perceptions of self or other (Frederickson, 2001).


Once accessed, these new emotional resources begin to undo the psychoaffective motor patterns that previously determined a person's
manner of processing (Greenberg, 2012).
Client markers for initiating therapist intervention
The defining approach of EFT is the use of markers to guide intervention. In session, clients present behaviours that indicate problematic
emotional processing states and afford opportunities for particular interventions (Greenberg et al., 1993, 1994; Rice & Greenberg, 1984).
Table 5.1 presents these client markers, which also indicate a client's immediate readiness to work on the respective problem.
Table 5.1 Process-experiential tasks: markers, interventions and end states
Task marker
Intervention
Experiential processing difficulty (e.g.
overwhelmed, blank, stuck, unclear)
Experiential focusing
(including clearing a space)
End state
Productive experiencing: (therapeutic focus;
enhanced working distance; symbolization of felt
sense)
Problematic reaction point (puzzling over- Systematic evocative unfolding New view of self-in-the-world-functioning
reaction to specific situation)
Meaning protest (life event violates
Meaning work
cherished belief)
Self-evaluative split (self-criticism, feeling Two-chair dialogue
torn)
Revision of cherished belief
Self-acceptance, integration


Self-interruption split (blocked feelings, resignation)
Unfinished business (lingering bad feeling about a significant other)
Vulnerability (painful emotion related to self)
Relational rupture (questioning goals or tasks; disrupted bond with therapist)
Note: Adapted from Greenberg & Elliott (2007).
Two-chair enactment
Empty-chair work
Empathic affirmation
Alliance dialogue (each explores own role in difficulty)
Self-expression, empowerment
Forgive other or hold other accountable, affirm the self, separate
Self-affirmation (feels understood, hopeful, stronger)
Alliance repair (stronger therapeutic bond or investment in therapy; greater self-understanding)
Unclear felt sense
An unclear felt sense is expressed when the person is in the vicinity of an experience yet unable to identify it (e.g. "I just have this feeling but
I don't know what it is"). The intervention for this marker is focusing (Gendlin, 1996), where the therapist guides the client to approach and
symbolize an embodied experience. The client is encouraged to identify the place in the body where he or she usually registers feelings (e.g.
the stomach, chest, throat), then to focus on it intently, and name or describe what comes up. This is not a cognitive reflection or monitoring
of the experience but simply an effort to identify the sensations of the experience. Once several elements have been identified, the client
selects one part to focus on. Both client and therapist work together to identify the experience, and several labels may be "tried on" until one
finds the right fit. Once a suitable label is found, the intervention starts to explore the meaning of that feeling and associated connections
that arise from it.


Problematic reactions
When clients express puzzlement about their own emotional and behavioural responses to particular situations, it is a problematic reaction
point (e.g. "yesterday I saw a little puppy with long droopy ears and I suddenly felt so sad and I don't know why"). The appropriate
intervention for this marker is systematic evocative unfolding. First, the therapist encourages the client to vividly describe the situation in
which the confusing emotion occurred. Once the re-creation is obtained, the client is guided through becoming aware of and symbolizing his
or her internal reactions, ultimately identifying a salient element that triggered the reaction. At this point, the client explores the personal
meaning of this element and the emotion scheme activated by the situation. In effect, the client works from a specific situation towards
recognizing a personal style and general way of responding, which then can be traced back to its origins and reappraised. The client may
come up with a new ways of responding emotionally or construing the situation.
Conflict splits
This marker involves the presence of a critical/coercive aspect of the self in relation to another aspect of oneself (e.g. a woman who is filled
with critical self-loathing over her failures to find employment and also suffers from depressive hopelessness). This marker is addressed by
a two-chair dialogue, where the two parts of the self are put into a "hot" dialogue in order to explore the thoughts, feelings and needs related
to each side. In the first section of the intervention, the focus is on becoming aware of the constant presence of a self-critical voice and its
emotional impact. In the "critical chair," the client vocalizes contemptuous self-criticism, which usually evokes powerlessness, helplessness,
hopelessness and core shame (Whelton & Greenberg, 2001). This portion captures the content of the critic's speech, as well as the feeling
and motivation in the critic in relation to the rest of the self. The client then moves into the "self chair" and explores the more vulnerable
emotional reaction to the critic. Here, the client formulates a differentiated sense of the emotional experience, advancing from an initial
global sense of hopelessness towards core maladaptive states. Often the core feeling is either shame about one's deficits or fear about one's


weakness and ability to survive alone. The therapist helps the client express maladaptive emotion and then to access primary adaptive needs
for survival (changing emotion with emotion). At this point, the therapist guides the client to access incipient new experience and express
it directly to the critical voice (Greenberg, 1984). This is the emergence of a resilient self in vivo. Accessing existential needs is a crucial
step in mobilizing resilience. Finally, self-critical splits are resolved by the critical voice softening into a more compassionate one, needs are
acknowledged and integrated, and greater self-acceptance is achieved (see Elliott et al., 2004; Greenberg et al., 1993).
Self-interruptive splits
Sometimes clients interrupt their own flow of emotional experience (e.g. a client gets teary, but then suddenly takes a deep breath and
stops, and the feeling "goes away"). Markers of self-interruption include resignation, feeling trapped, or emotional numbness, accompanied
by tightness of the chest, pain in the neck, and feelings of being physically blocked. When emotion is truncated by some automatic process,
the EFT intervention is to use a two-chair enactment, where the interrupted part of the self is deliberately enacted. A subtle distinction from
self-critical splits is that markers of the self-interruptive split involve actions against the self rather than evaluations of the self. Because
this maladaptive process often occurs abruptly and largely outside of awareness, it typically has more nonverbal and bodily aspects (e.g.
headache, holding breath, clenched jaw, tightness in the chest) than if self-criticism were the issue. The first aim of self-interruptive work
is to heighten the client's awareness of how the interruption happens. By enacting the interruption the client paradoxically becomes an
agent in this process. For example, the client verbalizes or gestures the particular interruptive act, then a rebellion against the suppression
recalcitrantly bursts through. Awareness of the process, in turn, leads to insight about what is being blocked, which opens up the internal
experience (Greenberg et al., 2014). At this point, the therapist helps the client to process the previously forbidden experience and expresses
action tendencies in a clearer manner.


Unfinished business: long-standing interpersonal difficulties
Lingering unresolved feelings towards a significant other is the client marker of unfinished business (e.g. "I have never forgiven him"; "deep
down inside I'm grieving for what I probably didn't have and know I never will have."). The associated EFT intervention is the empty-chair
dialogue, where the client activates and explores his or her perception of and personal emotional reactions to a significant other. Sequentially,
the client vividly tries to connect to the other in imagination, re-experiencing the other's presence, and speaking to the other as if he or
she were there. Later parts of the dialogue have the client enact (role-play) the other person's hurtful behaviours in a direct and immediate
way. This intervention uses emotional arousal to activate the problematic emotion scheme from memory (Greenberg & Malcolm, 2002).
Once the other's negative actions and attitudes are portrayed and this elicits the client's own strong and visceral affective reaction, the
therapist helps the client attend to emergent feelings about the other. The client is encouraged to express these emotions and to differentiate
their underlying meanings and feelings, particularly as related to primary emotions (e.g. "I resent you"; "I missed you"). When secondary
emotions are also expressed concomitantly (e.g. "You were a bastard!"), the therapist will acknowledge them while also guiding the client
towards the expression of primary emotions (i.e. "I deserved better!"; "I never had the love that only a parent could give").
As the therapist validates and facilitates the expression of primary emotions, the client also verbalizes unmet interpersonal needs for
attachment, separation or validation. In order to be productive, they must be expressed as belonging to and coming from the self, rather
than as deprivations or accusations of the other. Thus, these are assertions of the client as deserving to have one's needs met rather than
the expressions of desperate neediness. This step is crucial in helping people establish their sense of self as an agent, separate from the
other. At this stage the therapist simply follows the client, and encourages the expression of both newly experienced emotions and needs.
In addition, the therapist helps clients to symbolize and assert boundaries and to reassert their rights. In a final step, clients begin to let go
of constricted perceptions of themselves and of the significant other that were previously salient, reaching a sense of self-worth and letting
go of the unfinished business. This letting-go is accomplished in one of three major ways: through letting go of having the unmet need by

the specific significant other, through holding the other accountable for the violation and affirming the self, or through increased empathic
understanding of the other and possibly forgiving the other for past wrongs (Greenberg et al., 2014).
Vulnerability
Statements indicating fragility, deep shame or insecurity are the markers of client vulnerability (e.g. "I just feel like I've got nothing left. It's
too much to ask of myself to carry on."). This marker is addressed using affirming empathic validation, by which the therapist offers empathic
attunement and attempts to not only capture the content of the client's experience but also the rhythm and tone of that expression. The
goal here is to normalize and validate the client's experience. The therapist must communicate warm acceptance and deep empathy for
the client, offering a caring and non-rejecting secure contact for the client to explore the vulnerability further. The intervention leads to a
strengthening of the sense of self.
Several additional markers and their corresponding interventions have been added to these original markers in EFT. Some of these include
narrative retelling as a marker of trauma, repairs to alliance-rupture, self-soothing at anxious dependence and more (for details, see Elliott et
al., 2004; Greenberg & Watson, 2006).
Corrective experience
The principles and structure of EFT are geared towards transforming old maladaptive emotions via corrective emotional experience.
Experiences that provide interpersonal soothing, disconfirm pathogenic beliefs or offer new experience of success can correct maladaptive
patterns laid down earlier during difficult periods in one's life. For example, having one's assertive anger accepted by the therapist, rather
than rejected, leads to new ways of being. The goal in EFT is for clients, in the context of therapeutic support, to essentially gain mastery
in re-experiencing emotions that they previously could not handle, thereby repairing past damaging experiences while also cultivating
emotional resilience for the future.

Clients test, challenge and change their pathogenic ways of being via the therapeutic relationship (Weiss & Sampson, 1986). For example,
clients fearing abandonment may monitor the relationship to see if the therapist will abandon him or her; over time, as the therapist offers
caring, consistency and freedom, the client may assimilate these corrective experiences and the risk of abandonment may begin to seem less
threatening. In effect, clients re-experience events differently than they did originally because the adaptive, mature relationship with the
therapist is different that the relationship with their caretakers during the formative years. Now the client can express vulnerability without
being punished and can assert without being censured. The undeniable reality of this experience allows clients to experience that they
are no longer powerless children facing powerful adults. As the client experiences these positive changes in therapy, transition to similar
experiences in the world is also encouraged.
Leading and following
EFT can be summed up as building on a particular way of communicating with clients, one that integrates both "being" with the client and
"doing" tasks, in a duality of following and guiding. True to Rogers's (1951) principles of empathic attunement, the therapist follows the
client's internal experience as it evolves and then mirrors it back to the client. Given the precept that the client is an active, emotional being
trying to make meaning out of experience, the therapist tries to follow the client's narrative, prizing the client's initiative and agency, and
helps the client make sense out of his or her situation.
In another vein, true to the therapeutic facilitation processes of Gendlin (1996), the therapist also guides the client, much like a coach
that is knowledgeable about the theory of subjective terrain and emotional processing. The therapist does not lecture the client, give advice
or manipulate the client, but is rather always actively working with the client towards something (Mahrer, 1996, 2004). In this way,
interventions are offered as tentative experiments, perspectives or conjectures instead of expert statements. In EFT the duality of following
and leading is possible. There is a creative tension between these two vitally important elements of therapy.

Phases of treatment
EFT treatment is broken into three major phases (Table 5.2), each with a set of steps to describe its course over time (Greenberg & Watson,
2006).
Phase 1. Bonding and awareness
Phase 1 involves (1) attending, empathizing and validating the client's feelings and his or her current sense of self; (2) providing a rationale
for working with emotion; (3) promoting awareness of internal experience; and (4) establishing a collaborative focus (Greenberg et al.,
2014). From the first session, the therapist holds a therapeutic attitude of empathy and positive regard to help create a safe environment
for the later evocation and exploration of emotion. At the same time, the client also receives psychoeducation regarding how working with
emotions will help. The therapist offers the client guidance in the processes of emotional acceptance, exploration and regulation. Finally,
therapist and client collaborate to develop an understanding of the core pain and establish a set of tasks for addressing it.
Table 5.2 Phases of treatment in emotion-focused therapy
Phase I: bonding and awareness
1 Attending to, empathizing with and validating feelings and sense of self
2 Providing a rationale for working with emotion
3 Promoting awareness of internal experience

4 Establishing and developing a collaborative focus: identifying the underlying cognitive-affective processes or generating
conditions
Phase II: evocation and exploration
1 Establishing support for emotional experience
2 Arousing problematic feelings: the bad feeling or painful experience is brought alive in the session or regulated
3 Undoing interruptions of emotion
4 Helping access primary emotions or core maladaptive schemes
Phase III: transformation and generation of alternatives
1 Helping generate new emotional responses to transform core maladaptive schemes
2 Promoting reflection to make sense of experience
3 Validate new feelings and support a new emerging sense of self
Note: Based on Greenberg & Elliott (2007) and Greenberg et al. (2014).
Phase 2. Evocation and exploration
Phase 2 involves (1) establishing support for emotional experience; (2) arousing problematic feelings; (3) undoing interruptions of emotion;
and (4) helping access primary emotions or core maladaptive schemes (Greenberg et al., 2014). This phase aims at evocation and, if needed,
intensification of emotions. Prior to this, the therapist helps the client garner sufficient internal and external supports to ensure resilience
in the face of strong emotional experiencing. During the transition from the initial sessions, the therapist guides the client towards
establishing self-regulating and self-soothing skills. The goal of emotional evocation and exploration is to arrive at the deepest level of core

primary emotion. Once the client seems able to negotiate and engage painful aspects of emotional experiences, the EFT therapist will help a
client evoke, experience and explore what he or she feels (Greenberg, 2011).
During this phase, the client may avoid or interrupt the flow of emotional experience, stifling it by way of: physiological mannerisms (e.g.
holding one's breath), secondary emotional reactions (e.g. defensive anger), cognitive means (e.g. catastrophic expectations) and behavioural
avoidance (e.g. changing the topic). The therapist focuses on these processes and brings them into awareness so that these obstacles may be
dealt with.
Phase 3. Transformation and generation of alternatives
Phase 3 involves (1) helping generate new emotional responses to transform core maladaptive schemes; (2) promoting reflection to make
sense of experience; and (3) validating new feelings and supporting a new emerging sense of self. As the client approaches and symbolizes
core maladaptive emotion, the emphasis in session shifts to the construction of alternative ways of responding emotionally, cognitively
and behaviourally. This portion of work allows for other internal resources to be accessed and for adaptive emotional responses to emerge,
creating a more integrated and stronger sense of self and self-narrative.
The core of EFT practice thus lies in accessing primary emotions. In some cases, as the client explores emotional experience, he or she
accesses unexpressed underlying yet adaptive emotions, and this is where one finds the motivation and direction for change. As discussed,
for example, accessing adaptive anger empowers and reorganizes one to assert boundaries; action replaces resignation and motivated desire
replaces hopelessness.
In many instances, however, the core primary emotion is maladaptive. Maladaptive core schemes represent a more dominant negative
voice or narrative connected to feelings such as a sense of powerlessness, or feeling invisible, unloved, or unlovable, or a deep sense of shame
or insecurity. These maladaptive schemes are often the deeper experience to secondary bad feelings such as despair, panic, hopelessness
or global distress. Such primary maladaptive emotion schemes must be accessed and explored. Their subsequent transformation occurs

through the experiential challenge of newly accessed (and often less dominant) feelings: primary adaptive emotion. Thus, change occurs by
means of a dialectical confrontation between two parts of the self. This confrontation between the two voices leads to a synthesis of alternate
views and ultimately to the creation of a categorically new experience and meaning (Greenberg & Elliott, 2007). In the end, it is the person's
response to their own symbolized distress that is adaptive and must be accessed and used as a life-giving resource.
Case study
Greenberg (2011) described a case where a 39-year-old woman tearfully reports chronic depression, which worsened significantly over the
past year as she lost her employment and became socially withdrawn. Her relationships with her family of origin were difficult and painful.
At the time she presented, she no longer had contact with her mother, who was alcoholic. Her father was a concentration camp survivor and
had always been emotionally distant, yet also critical and judgemental, and physically punitive.
The initial sessions consist of a review of the client's history and presenting problem. The therapist listens, and uses empathic explorations
to communicate his understanding. While the client is able to focus on her experience, she also reports the tendency to avoid painful and
difficult emotions. The therapist notes criticism and complaint towards her parents, and her unexpressed resentment towards her father in
particular. This marker suggests unfinished business with her father, perhaps undermining her sense of self-worth. The therapist offers his
formulation that her self-criticism and unresolved anger towards her parents are contributing to her depression. The goal at this stage of the
treatment is to address these two issues.
In the following sessions, client and therapist explore the relationship with her father, whom she feels never seemed to approve of her.
During an empty-chair dialogue, the client imagines voicing to her father the meaning she has attached to their interactions. The dialogue
reveals that the client had internalized the familial tension as self-criticism and the belief that she is worthless and unlovable. Also, both her
self-criticism and need for approval relate to her neglect and unmet need for love. She has learned to interrupt her experience of this need

as a way of avoiding feeling vulnerable and alone instead of being self-reliant. However, this strategy leaves her feeling hopeless and isolated
and contributes to depression.
At this point, using self-critical dialogues allows the inner critic to be made explicit; she puts a voice to the way she belittles her own needs
for others and tells herself she is not good enough - these are criticisms she learned from her parents. With empathic support from the
therapist, the client expresses pain to the critic and is able to assert herself as a person worthy of love - love which was denied by parents who
were unable to show emotion and nurturance. As the critic softens, the client is able to challenge the part of herself that interrupts her from
asking to be loved; it is no longer as necessary to protect herself from that suffering. She continues to define and speak from both voices and
expresses a range of feelings: pain about her loneliness, anger at her interruptive self, and grief for the childhood she missed out on.
In later sessions, the client gains increasing access to alternative emotions of pride, anger, and more grief over the loss of love from her
parents. By expressing entitlement to her need for love and processing her anger and sadness, she transformed her shame. In the process,
she also developed a more compassionate position towards her father. Even so, she eventually holds him accountable for hurting her, while
at the same time accepting that he will not be able to meet her needs. At this point in treatment, she feels pride and then joy for having
overcome these feelings. Her shame-based core maladaptive belief that "I am not worth loving" has been transformed by new meaning she
has constructed: that the pain in her father's life led him to be less available and less able to behave in loving ways towards her and her
sisters. She feels she can now manage whatever her father is able to offer and has also developed greater assertiveness and ability to be close
to others.
Summary
In an era of increasing demands for brief, effective treatments, EFT offers a viable development of the humanistic tradition in psychotherapy
(Greenberg & Elliott, 2007). Therapeutic interventions in this approach target the processes that automatically generate the emotional

experience that underlie clients' sense of themselves. Given that the emotion system is developed for promoting survival and growth,
access to emotion provides essential information about a person's needs, makes maladaptive schemes accessible to restructuring, and leads
to behavioural change. Conversely, dysfunction is seen as occurring via general and specific types of emotional processing problems, such
as failing to acknowledge immediate affective experience, the activation of maladaptive emotion schemes, and the inability to integrate
disparate emotional experiences. Emotion-focused therapy involves accessing client's adaptive emotional capacities and then promoting
different types of processing to facilitate different types of problem resolution. While emotion is seen as the fundamental datum of human
experience, it is also acknowledged that emotion and cognition are inextricably connected in the process of meaning making. In deciding
the trajectory of treatment, EFT clinicians make process diagnoses of the particular type of processing difficulty in which the client is
immediately engaged and make use of specific marker-driven interventions. Ultimately, EFT's central focus is on accessing and utilizing
adaptive emotions to promote transformation of maladaptive emotion structures and allow for further growth.
Web-based resources
Website of the World Association for Person-Centred and Experiential Psychotherapy and Counselling: http://www.pce-world.org
Emotion-Focused Therapy: http://www.emotionfocusedtherapy.org (Les Greenberg's website); http://www.process-experiential.org
(Robert Elliott's website)
Emotionally Focused Couple Therapy: http://www.iceeft.com (Sue Johnson's website)
Training DVDs
Greenberg, L. S. (2007). Emotion-Focused Therapy for Depression, APA, ISBN: 978-1-59147-813-3.


Goldman, R. N. (2013). Case Formulation in Emotion-Focused Therapy: Addressing Unfinished Business, APA, ISBN: 978-1-4338-1694-9.
Johnson, S. (2011). Emotionally Focused Couple Therapy for Clients Dealing With Infidelity, APA, ISBN: 978-1-4338-0988-0.
Paivio, S. C. (2013). Emotion-Focused Therapy for Trauma, APA, ISBN: 978-1-4338-1560-7.
Watson, J. C. (2013). Emotion-Focused Therapy in Practice: Working With Grief and Abandonment, APA, ISBN: 978-1-4338-1559-1.
References
Bohart, A., & Greenberg, L. (Eds.). (1997). Empathy Reconsidered: New Directions in Theory Research & Practice. Washington, DC: APA Press.
Bolger, E. (1996). The Subjective Experience of Transformation Through Pain in ACOAS. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, York University,
Toronto.
Bordin, E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the working alliance. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and
Practice, 16, 252-260.
Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt College
Publishers.
Davidson, R. (2000). Affective style, psychopathology and resilience: Brain mechanisms and plasticity. American Psychologist, 5, 1193-
1196.
Elliott, R., & Greenberg, L. S. (1997). Multiple voices in process-experiential therapy: Dialogues between aspects of the self. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 7, 225-239.
Elliott, R., Watson, J. C., Goldman, R. N., & Greenberg, L. S. (2004). Learning emotion-focused therapy: The process-experiential approach to
change. Washington, DC: APA.


Foa, E. B., & Jaycox, L. H. (1999). Cognitive-behavioural theory and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. In D. Spiegel (Ed.), Efficacy
and Cost-Effectiveness of Psychotherapy (pp. 23-61). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.
Frattaroli, J. (2006). Experimental disclosure and its moderators: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 823-865.
Frederickson, B. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The broaden-and-build theory of positive emotions.
American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.
Frijda, N. H. (1986). The emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gendlin, E. T. (1964). A theory of personality change. In P. Worchel & D. Byrne (Eds.), Personality change (pp. 100-148). New York: Wiley.
Gendlin, G. T. (1996). Focusing-oriented psychotherapy: A manual of the experiential method. New York: Guilford.
Goldman, R., & Greenberg, L. S. (1995). A process experiential approach to case formulation. In Session, 1(2), 35-51.
Goldman, R., & Greenberg, L. S. (1997). Case formulation in process-experiential therapy. In T. D. Eells (Ed.), Handbook of Psychotherapy
Case Formulation (pp. 402-429). New York: Guilford.
Goldman, R. H., Greenberg, L. S., & Pos, A. E. (2005). Depth of emotional experience and outcome. Psychotherapy Research, 15, 248-260.
Greenberg, L. S. (1984). A task analysis of intrapersonal conflict resolution. In L. Rice & L. Greenberg (Eds.), Patterns of Change (pp. 67-
123). New York: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S. (2002). Emotion-Focused Therapy: Coaching Clients to Work Through Feelings. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association Press.
Greenberg, L. S. (2010). Emotion focused therapy: A clinical synthesis. FOCUS, 8(1), 32-42.
Greenberg, L. S. (2011). Emotion-Focused Therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Greenberg, L. S. (2012). Emotions, the great captains of our lives: Their role in the process of change in psychotherapy. American
Psychologist, 67, 695-697.


Greenberg, L. S., & Angus, L. (2004). The contributions of emotion processes to narrative change in psychotherapy: A dialectical
constructivist approach. In L. Angus & J. McLeod (Eds.), Handbook of Narrative Psychotherapy: Practice, Theory, and Research (pp. 331-
349). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Greenberg, L. S., Auszra, L., & Hermann, I. R. (2007). The relationship among emotional productivity, emotional arousal, and outcome in
experiential therapy of depression. Psychotherapy Research, 17, 482-493.
Greenberg, L. S., & Elliott, R. (1997). Varieties of empathic responding. In A. Bohart & L. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy Reconsidered: New
Directions in Theory, Research and Practice (pp. 167-186). Washington, DC: APA Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & Elliott, R. (2007). The essence of process-experiential/emotion-focused therapy. American Journal of Psychotherapy,
61, 1-14.
Greenberg, L. S., Elliott, R., & Lietaer, G. (1994). Research on humanistic and experiential psychotherapies. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield
(Eds.), Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behaviour Change (Fourth Edition, pp. 509-539). New York: Wiley.
Greenberg, L. S., Elliott, R., & Pos, A. E. (2008). Emotion-focused therapy: An overview. European Journal of Experiential Psychotherapy, 7,
19-40.
Greenberg, L. S., & Korman, L. (1993). Integrating emotion in psychotherapy integration. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 3, 249-
266. (Translated into Spanish.)
Greenberg, L. S., & Malcolm, W. (2002). Resolving unfinished business: Relating process to outcome. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 70, 406-416.
Greenberg, L. S., McWilliams, N., & Wenzel, A. (2014). Exploring three approaches to psychotherapy. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Greenberg, L. S., & Paivio, S. (1997). Working with Emotions in Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford.


Greenberg, L. S., & Pascual-Leone, J. (1995). A dialectical constructivist approach to experiential change. In R. Neimeyer & M. Mahoney
(Eds.), Constructivism in Psychotherapy (pp. 169–191). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Greenberg, L. S., & Pascual-Leone, J. (1997). Emotion in the creation of personal meaning. In M. Power & C. Brewin (Eds.), The
Transformation of Meaning. Reconciling Theory and Therapy in Cognitive Behaviour and Related Therapies (pp. 157-173). Chichester:
Wiley.
Greenberg, L. S., & Pascual-Leone, J. (2001). A dialectical constructivist view of the creation of personal meaning. Journal of Constructivist
Psychology, 14, 165-186.
Greenberg, L. S., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2006). Emotion in psychotherapy: A practice-friendly research review. Journal of Clinical
Psychology: In Session.
Greenberg, L. S., Rice, L. N., & Elliott, R. (1993). Facilitating Emotional Change: The Moment-By-Moment Process. New York: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & Safran, J. D. (1987). Emotion in Psychotherapy: Affect, Cognition, and the Process of Change. New York: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & Safran, J. D. (1989). Emotion in psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 44, 19–68.
Greenberg, L. S., & van Balen, R. (1998). The theory of experience-centred therapies. In L. S. Greenberg, J. C. Watson, & G. Lietaer (Eds.),
Handbook of Experiential Psychotherapy (pp. 28-57). New York: Guilford Press.
Greenberg, L. S., & Watson, J. C. (2006). Emotion-focused therapy for depression. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The Organization of Behaviour. New York: Wiley.
Kabat-Zinn, J., Lipworth, L., Burney, R., & Sellers, W. (1986). Four year follow-up of a meditation-based program for the self-regulation of
chronic pain: Treatment outcomes and compliance. Clinical Journal of Pain, 2, 159–173.
Kabat-Zinn, J., Massion, A. O., Kristeller, J., Peterson, L. G., Fletcher, K. E., Pbert, L., ... Santorelli, S. F. (1992). Effectiveness of a meditation-
based stress reduction program in the treatment of anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 936-943.
Kennedy-Moore, E., & Watson, J. C. (1999). Expressing Emotion: Myths, Realities, and Therapeutic Strategies. New York: Guilford Press.


LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Lieberman, M. D., Jarcho, J. M., & Satpute, A. B. (2004). Evidence-based and intuition-based self-knowledge: an fMRI study. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 421-435.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-Behavioural Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford.
Mahrer, A. R. (1996). Studying distinguished practitioners: a humanistic approach to discovering how to do psychotherapy. Journal of
Humanistic Psychology, 36, 31-48.
Mahrer, A. R. (2004). The Complete Guide to Experiential Psychotherapy. Boulder, CO: Bull Publishing Company.
May, R., & Yalom, I. (1989). Existential psychotherapy. In R. Corsini & D. Wedding (Eds.), Current Psychotherapies (pp. 363-404). Itasca IL:
Peacock.
Oatley, K. (1992). Best Laid Schemes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Paivio, S. C., & Nieuwenhuis, J. A. (2001). Efficacy of emotionally focused therapy for adult survivors of child abuse: A preliminary study.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 14, 115-134.
Paivio, S. C., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2010). Emotion Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma: An Integrative Approach. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Pascual-Leone, A., Gillis, P., Singh, T., & Andreescu, C. (2013). Problem anger in psychotherapy: An emotion-focused perspective on hate,
rage, and rejecting anger. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 43, 83-92.
Pascual-Leone, A., & Greenberg, L. S. (2006). Insight and awareness in experiential therapy. In L. G. Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), Insight
in Psychotherapy (pp. 31–56). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Pascual-Leone, A., & Greenberg, L. (2007). Emotional processing in experiential therapy: Why "the only way out is through." Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 875-887.


Pascual-Leone, A., Paivio, S., & Harrington, S. (in press). Emotion in psychotherapy: An experiential- humanistic perspective. In D. Cain,
S. Rubin, K. Keenan (Eds.) Humanistic Psychotherapies: Handbook of Research and Practice (Second Edition). Washington, DC: APA.
Pennebaker, J. W. (1995). Emotion, disclosure and health. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Pessoa, L. (2013). The Cognitive-Emotional Brain: From Interactions to Integration. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rice, L. N. (1974). The evocative function of the therapist. In D. Wexler & L. N. Rice (Eds.), Innovations in Client-Centred Therapy (pp. 289-
311). New York: Wiley.
Rice, L. N., & Greenberg, L. S. (Eds.). (1984). Patterns of Change: An Intensive Analysis of Psychotherapeutic Process. New York: Guilford
Press.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-Centred Therapy: Its Current Practice, Implications, and Theory. Oxford, UK: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21, 95-
103.
Sroufe, L. A. (1996). Emotional development: The organization of emotional life in the early years. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stanton, A. L., Danoff-Burg, S., Camerson, C. L., Bishop, M., Colling, C. A., Kirk, S. B.... Twillman, R. (2000). Emotionally expressive coping
predicts psychological and physical adjustment to breast cancer. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 875-882.
Stern, D. (1985). The Interpersonal World of the Infant. New York: Basic Books.
Taylor, G. J., & Bagby, R. M. (2013). Psychoanalysis and empirical research: The example of alexithymia. Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association, 61, 99-133.
Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Williams, J.M.G., Ridgeway, V. A., Soulsby, J. M., & Lau, M. A. (2000). Prevention of relapse/recurrence in major
depression by mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 615-623.
Watson, J. C., & Greenberg, L. S. (1996). Pathways to change in the psychotherapy of depression. Relating process to session change and
outcome. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 33, 262-274.


Weiss, J., & Sampson, H. (1986). The Psychoanalytic Process: Theory, Clinical Process, and Empirical Research. San Francisco, CA: Guilford
Press.
Whelton, W. J., & Greenberg, L. S. (2001). The self a singular multiplicity: A process-experiential perspective. In J. C. Muran (Ed.), Self-
Relations in Psychotherapy (pp. 87-106). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.


Chapter 6 Systemic couple therapy
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-6
Case vignette
James and Sarah, a couple in their mid-twenties, were referred by a social worker for therapy at a psychology clinic attached to a general
hospital. In the referral letter the social worker said that the couple had multiple problems. James had an explosive temper, which was
frightening for Sarah and her two children. Sarah, who had a history of panic attacks, had developed a constricted lifestyle because of fears
of having panic attacks when away from home. The couple argued constantly. The case was referred to social services by a health visitor
who became concerned for the welfare of the couple's children, Kelly (4 years) and Luke (1 year), when conducting a routine developmental
assessment visit with Luke around the time of his first birthday. The social worker visited the couple at their home and met with a frosty
reception. The couple initially insisted that everything was OK and that no family evaluation or support was required. The social worker
explained that she had a statutory obligation to evaluate the capacity of the parents to provide a safe and secure home environment for the

children. One recommendation arising from the social worker's assessment was that the couple complete a programme of couple therapy to
address the conflict between them, since this was interfering with their capacity to cooperatively meet their children's needs.
Because of the couple's ambivalence about attending therapy, invitations to an initial contracting meeting were sent to the referring social
worker and the couple, with a request that the social worker arrange transportation for the couple to attend the psychology clinic. In the
intake meeting the couple expressed their ambivalence about attending therapy, but the social worker pointed out that if the couple decided
not to attend therapy, their children's names would be placed on an at-risk register held at her department. In light of this information, the
couple agreed to attend two sessions during which an assessment would be conducted. If that indicated that they were suitable for therapy,
a further contract for 10 sessions of therapy would be offered.
In the assessment sessions, it became clear that episodes of conflict would usually start by Sarah not doing something that James
aggressively demanded, such as soothing the children or being attentive to his needs. In response, James would criticise her, and she would
initially fight back but eventually go quiet or have a panic attack. James would then back off. The couple would then not be on speaking
terms for a few days. Gradually they would have increasingly more contact until the next episode. Sarah's beliefs, which underpinned her
behaviour in these episodes, were that the demands of life, her children and her partner were too great for her to manage and she would
usually fail. She also believed that arguments between couples were competitive exchanges that were won or lost. She believed that she could
never beat James in an argument and so gave up each time, a process that reinforced her beliefs in her own lack of power to influence James.
Also when she became frustrated she believed that her increased arousal was a sign that she was about to have a heart attack, a belief that
often preceded her panic attacks. Sarah had learned this pessimistic way of viewing the world from her mother, who had long-standing
depression, and from observing her parents' very unhappy marriage. James behaved as he did during problematic episodes because he
believed that Sarah was being purposefully uncooperative to punish him and that it was unfair that she didn't cherish him, because he was
devoted to her. He had a general disposition to believe that others were trying to take advantage of him, a hostile attributional bias, which he


had learned from his father. James had a conflictual relationship with his father, who treated his mother as James treated Sarah. A detailed
diagram of this formulation of Sarah and James's problematic episodes is given in Figure 6.1.
On the positive side there were exceptional episodes where James helped rather than criticised Sarah when she was having difficulty
soothing the children or cooking dinner, doing the washing or some other household job. In response, she smiled at him and good feelings
between them followed. James had learned from his mother that 'a little kindness goes a long way' and it was this belief that underpinned his
generous behaviour. Sarah had learned that 'one good turn deserves another' from her dad with whom she had a good relationship and this
underpinned her good feelings when James was kind to her. A three-column formulation of these exceptional episodes in which the problem
would be expected to occur but did not is given in Figure 6.2. The couple's genogram is given in Figure 6.3. The genogram threw light on some
of the contextual factors included in the third column of the problem and exception formulations.
CONTEXTS
BELIEF SYSTEMS
BEHAVIOUR PATTERN
Long term exposure to
Long-term exposure to
Sarah believes the demands of
she is angry with her for this
Sarah does not meet
her needs
depressive thinking style in
Sarah has had long-standing
Couple's history of
James believes arguments are
Competitions that can be lost or
believes her arousal is a sign of
Sarah fights with James
but eventually she goes
an inevitable panic attack
quiet and sometimes has a
--- OCR End ---

Figure 6.1 Three-column formulation of Sarah and James's problematic episodes
On the basis of the assessment and formulations the couple was offered and accepted a contract for 10 sessions of couple therapy. The
therapy focused on a number of issues. First, the couple's difficulties were reframed as an interactional problem. They learned to monitor
the occurrence of problematic episodes and to withdraw from them if they spotted themselves contributing to them. Second, the couple
noted the similarities between their exceptional problem-free episodes and cooperative communication and problem-solving skills. They
developed these skills further so they could apply them to potentially conflictual situations. Third, James learned to identify and express his
attachment needs in a direct way, and to use this skill regularly to prevent a build-up of need frustration and aggression. Fourth, Sarah was
helped to control her panic attacks using a cognitive behavioural programme involving exposure to interoceptive cues and relaxation and
coping skills training. Fifth, James helped Sarah overcome her agoraphobia through partner-assisted graded exposure to feared situations
involving travelling away from the house for gradually increasing distances.


CONTEXTS
BELIEF SYSTEMS
BEHAVIOUR PATTERN
Long-term positive
relationship with his mother
in James's family of origin
James learned 'a little
kindness goes a long way' from
his mother
James helps Sarah to do
family tasks that meet his
needs
Long-term positive
relationship with her father
in Sarah's family of origin
Sarah learned 'one good turn
deserves another' from her father
Sarah smiles and is good-
humoured
Couple's history of
commitment to each other
and history of exceptional
non-problematic episodes
James and Sarah believe that
their relationship provides love,
safety, security and is central to
the viability of their family
James and Sarah feel good
about co-operating

Figure 6.2 Three-column formulation of Sarah and James's exceptional episodes
Depressed
Roger
Teresa
Conor
Rachel
Mike
30y
Terry
30y
Diana
9y
Sharlot
29y
George
34y
M 6y ago
James
28y
Sarah
26y
Loyal and
committed to
solving problems
Luke
1y
Kelly
4y
Hardworking and
loyal to relationship
Anger control
problems
Panic attacks
Agoraphobia
Charlie
2y
Noel
4y
Aidan
6y

Figure 6.3 James and Sarah's genogram
After 10 sessions a review conducted with the referring social worker indicated that the children were doing much better. The social
services department decided that frequent monitoring of the family was no longer necessary. The couple reported the following treatment
gains. The frequency of their unproductive arguments reduced from five to one per week. Their marital satisfaction improved. Supportive
links with each of their families of origin were strengthened. Both members of the couple reported marked improvements in James's anger
management and Sarah's panic disorder with agoraphobia.
A relapse occurred 2 years after treatment at a time when Sarah began working outside the home for the first time since the birth of
the first child. After two sessions focusing on managing the conflicts associated with the new demands on the family, the frequency of the
couple's unproductive arguments reduced again.
Varieties of couple therapy
There are many models of couple therapy (Carr, 2012; Gurman, 2008; Halford & Markman, 1997). Approaches to couple therapy have been
developed within systemic, cognitive- behavioural, and psychodynamic psychotherapeutic traditions. In addition, specific models of couple
therapy have been developed for particular problems such as depression or alcohol misuse. These therapy approaches and models may be
classified in terms of their central focus of therapeutic concern and in particular with respect to their emphasis on (1) repetitive problem-
maintaining behaviour patterns; (2) constraining belief systems that support these behaviour patterns; and (3) constitutional, contextual
or historical factors which predispose couples to adopt particular belief systems and engage in particular problem-maintaining behaviour
patterns (Carr, 2012). In the same vein, hypotheses and formulations about couple's problems and strengths may be conceptualised in terms
of these three domains. Also, interventions may be classified in terms of the specific domains they target. In this chapter an integrative


approach to systemic couple therapy (ISCT) will be described (Carr, 2012). The approach draws on theoretical and clinical insights from a
variety of models of couple therapy (Gurman, 2008; Halford & Markman, 1997) and the results of research on the effectiveness of particular
couple therapy practices (Carr, 2009, 2014). Three-column formulation is central to ISCT, and it is to this that we now turn.
Behaviour patterns, belief systems and broader contexts
In ISCT, for any problem, an initial hypothesis and later formulation may be constructed in which the behaviour pattern which maintains
the problem is specified; the constraining belief systems which underpin the partners' roles in this pattern are outlined; and the broader
contextual factors that predispose couples to these belief systems and behaviour patterns are given. For example, in the vignette that
opened this chapter, our initial hypothesis was that the couple got involved in regular conflictual patterns of interaction in which James's
anger control problems and possibly Sarah's panic attacks might have played a part. Our second hypothesis was that the belief systems
which underpinned their roles in these interaction patterns involved James having views about being entitled to certain things from Sarah,
and Sarah believing that she was either in danger or powerless. Our third hypothesis was that these beliefs and behaviour patterns had
their roots in adverse family-of-origin experiences. These hypotheses were checked out during the assessment interviews and led to the
development of the three-column problem formulation in Figure 6.1.
In ISCT, a couple's strengths may be conceptualised as involving exceptional interaction patterns within which the problem does not
occur; empowering belief systems which inform partners' roles within these interaction patterns; and broader contextual factors that
underpin these competency-oriented belief systems and that provide a foundation for resilience. For example, in the vignette that opened
this chapter, our first strengths-oriented hypothesis was that occasionally the couple became involved in cooperative patterns of interaction.
Our second hypothesis was that the belief systems that underpinned their roles in these interaction patterns involved James's and Sarah's
commitment to their marriage and to raising their children together. Our third hypothesis was that these beliefs and behaviour patterns had

their roots in positive family-of-origin experiences and positive experiences within their own relationship. These hypotheses were checked
out during the assessment interviews and led to the development of the three-column exception formulation in Figure 6.2.
In light of formulations of a couple's problems and strengths, a range of interventions that address interaction patterns, belief systems
and broader contextual factors may be considered. Those which fit best for the couple, make best use of their strengths, and for which there
is best evidence of effectiveness may be selected. Some interventions aim primarily to disrupt problem-maintaining interaction patterns,
for example communication and problem-solving skills training. Others aim to help couples evolve more liberating and flexible belief
systems, for example reframing difficulties viewed by couples as individual deficits, as shared interactional behaviour patterns. Still other
interventions aim to modify the negative impact of broader contextual factors, for example helping couples strengthen their social support
networks.
The three-column problem formulation model
To aid the processes of hypothesising and formulating about couples' problems, ideas from many schools of couple therapy have been
integrated into a three-column problem formulation model, presented in Table 6.1 (Carr, 2012).
Problem-maintaining behaviour patterns
Formulations and hypotheses in this style of practice must always include a detailed description of the problem and the pattern of behaviour
in which it is embedded. This is placed in the right-hand column of a three-column formulation. The problem-maintaining behaviour
pattern includes a description of what happens before, during and after the problem in a typical episode. Commonly, the pattern will also
include positive and negative feelings. These offer clues as to why the pattern is rigid and repeats recursively. For example, James, in the
vignette that opened the chapter, when describing a typical problematic behaviour pattern, said he shouted because he knew that in the


end Sarah would give in, and this would make him feel like he had won. And Sarah said that she went quiet after the shouting got too loud
because it brought relief. So feelings associated with winning and relief were critical to maintaining the behaviour pattern in which the
problem was embedded.
Problems may be maintained by behaviour patterns involving ineffective attempted solutions (Shoham et al., 2008). A minor problem,
such as disagreeing about what TV station to watch, may become a major problem, such as a series of escalating near-violent rows, because
of the way a couple try to repeatedly solve this difficulty using ineffective solutions, such as coercion. Confused communication may also
maintain problem behaviour, often because it leads to a lack of clarity about partners' positions, wishes, feelings and expectations.
Behaviour patterns that involve high rates of negative, critical or punitive exchanges and low rates of positive, supportive exchanges
between partners can maintain problems (Gottman, 1993). It was noted in Chapter 1 that a ratio of 5:1 positive to negative exchanges
characterises well-adjusted couples. Interaction patterns characterised by a lack of intimacy or a significant imbalance of power may also
maintain relationship dissatisfaction and other problems (Jacobson & Christensen, 1996).
Table 6.1 Three-column problem formulation model for systemic couple therapy
Contexts
Contexts
Constitutional
• Genetic vulnerabilities
• Debilitating somatic states
Belief systems
Belief systems
• Denial of the problem
Behaviour patterns
Behaviour patterns
• The couple's or symptomatic partner's
problem behaviour


• Early illness or injury
• Learning difficulty
• Difficult temperament
Contextual
• Constraining cultural norms and values
• Current lifecycle transitions
• Home-work role strain
• Lack of social support
• Recent loss experiences
• Recent illness or injury
• Unemployment
• Moving house
• Poverty
• Secret romantic affairs
Historical
• Major family-of-origin stresses
1. Bereavements
2. Separations
• Rejection of a systemic framing
of the problem in favour of an
individualistic framing
• Constraining beliefs about personal
competence to solve the problem
• Constraining beliefs about problems
and solutions relevant to the
presenting problem
• Constraining beliefs about the
negative consequences of change
and the negative events that may be
avoided by maintaining the status
quo
• Constraining beliefs about
relationships with partners and
other network members (e.g.
differences are battles which can be
won or lost)
• The sequence of events that typically
precedes and follows an episode of the
symptoms or problem behaviour
• The feelings and emotions that
accompany these behaviours,
particularly positive feelings or
payoffs
• Patterns involving ineffective
attempted solutions
• Patterns involving confused
communication
• Patterns involving high rates of
negative exchanges and low rates of
positive exchanges
• Patterns involving expression of
negative emotions due to fears of
attachment needs being unmet
• Patterns involving lack of marital
intimacy

3. Child abuse
4. Social disadvantage
5. Institutional upbringing
• Family-of-origin parent-child problems
• Insecure attachment
• Authoritarian parenting
• Permissive parenting
• Neglectful parenting
• Inconsistent parental discipline
• Lack of stimulation
• Scapegoating
• Triangulation
• Family-of-origin parental problems
• Parental psychological problems
• Parental drug or alcohol abuse
• Parental criminality
• Marital discord or violence
• Family disorganisation
• Constraining attributional style
(internal, global, stable, intentional
attributions for problem behaviours)
• Constraining cognitive distortions
1. Maximising negatives
2. Minimising positives
• Constraining defence mechanisms
• Denial
• Passive aggression
• Rationalisation
• Reaction formation
• Displacement
• Splitting
• Projection
• Patterns involving a significant
marital power imbalance
• Symmetrical and complementary
behaviour patterns
• Enmeshed and disengaged behaviour
patterns
• Rigid and chaotic behaviour patterns
• Coercive interaction patterns
• Patterns involving inadvertent
reinforcement
• Triangulation of children
• Patterns including lack of
coordination among involved
professionals and family members
Note: Based on Carr, A. (2012). Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice (Third Edition). Chichester: Wiley.

Symmetrical interactions in which, for example, aggression from one partner is responded to with aggression from another partner; or
complementary behaviour patterns where, for example, increasing dependence or illness in one partner is met with increasing caretaking in
another partner may also characterise problem-maintaining behaviour patterns (Haley, 1963).
Problems may be maintained by enmeshed, over-involved relationships and also by distant, disengaged relationships. Rigid repetitive
interactions or chaotic unpredictable interactions may also maintain problems (Minuchin, 1974).
Coercive interaction patterns, where partners repeatedly engage in escalating aggressive exchanges that conclude with withdrawal and a
sense of relief for all involved, may lead to escalations in relational aggression (Patterson, 1982). Problems may also be maintained when
partners inadvertently reinforce each other's problem behaviour.
Problems may be maintained by triangulation where partners involve children in their conflict (Minuchin, 1974). In a detouring-
attacking triad, partners express their anger at each other through the child, who often has conduct problems. In a detouring-protecting
triad, partners express their disappointment with each other through their joint concern about the child, who often has a psychosomatic
complaint.
A lack of coordination among involved professionals including health, social service and other professionals may maintain problematic
behaviour.
Problem-maintaining belief systems
Problem-maintaining behaviour patterns may be supported by a wide variety of constraining belief systems (Carr, 2012). Problem-
maintaining behaviour patterns may persist because one or both partners deny the existence of the problem. For example, alcohol or drug
problems may persist because the partner with the problem does not accept that there is a difficulty. Problem-maintaining behaviour
patterns may persist because partners reject a systemic framing of the problem and so deny their role in either maintaining the problem or
contributing to its resolution. For example, couples in which one partner is depressed may reject the idea that their difficulty in increasing

supportive interaction within the couple may maintain the mood disorder. Problem-maintaining behaviour patterns may persist because
couples believe that they are not competent to solve the problem. In the case vignette that opened the chapter, Sarah believed she was
helpless to influence her problematic interactions with James. Problem-maintaining behaviour patterns may persist because partners have
theories about the cause of the problem and the appropriate way to solve it that are not particularly useful. For example, where partners
believe that anxiety, depression or other biopsychosocial difficulties are wholly biologically determined and require pharmacological
treatment, this belief may underpin problem-maintaining behaviour, such as passivity.
Beliefs about the negative consequences of change and the negative events that may be avoided by maintaining the status quo may also
underpin problem-maintaining behaviour. For example, a husband in a discordant marriage may persist in limiting his partner's freedom
because he may believe that to treat her as an equal would involve him accepting a lower status, and ultimately this would lead his wife to
leave him.
There are many beliefs about couple relationships that can maintain problem behaviour, and these beliefs often take the form: 'A good
husband or wife always does X in this type of situation' or 'If X does Y in a marriage then A should do B because it's right, fair or feels like the
right thing to do.'
An attributional style where internal, global, stable attributions are made for problem behaviour and external, specific, unstable
situational attributions are made for good behaviour may lead partners to persist in problem-maintaining behaviour and to elicit problem-
maintaining behaviour in each other (Finchman & Bradbury, 1992). Such attributions include defining the self or one's partner as 'bad,
sad, sick or mad', although often more sophisticated labels than these are used. For example, couples may accuse each other of being
intentionally hurtful or vindictive (i.e. 'bad') and this can support coercive interaction patterns characterised by low intimacy and power
imbalance, which in turn maintains the couple's discord. Or couples may define one partner as neurotic (i.e. 'sick'). This can support extreme
complementary interaction patterns characterised by extreme caregiving and care-receiving roles. Such roles compromise the intimacy and
power balance within the relationship and maintain the couple's discord.


A belief system characterised by cognitive distortions such as maximising negatives and minimising positives may also support problem-
maintaining interaction patterns. For example, a depressed husband who sees every glass as half-empty rather than half-full and every
silver lining as part of a dark rain cloud may find that this style of thinking leads him to behave in ways that prevent him from receiving
the support he needs from his partner to break out of his depression. Cognitive distortions are listed in Table 3.2 and discussed in Chapter 3.
Certain problematic defence mechanisms may be central to belief systems that maintain problematic behaviour patterns. Defence
mechanisms are used to regulate anxiety that accompanies conflict due to a desire to pursue one course of action while fearing the
consequences of doing so. Problematic defence mechanisms include denial, as has already been mentioned, and also passive aggression,
rationalisation, reaction formation, displacement, splitting and projection. With passive aggression, rather than openly talking about a
conflict of interests within the couple, one partner passively avoids cooperating with others. With rationalisation, couples construct rational
arguments to justify destructive behaviour. With reaction formation and displacement, rather than openly talking about a conflict of
interests, one partner treats the other as if he or she were strongly admired and liked, but anger towards the true target of aggression
may be displaced onto another family member or the partner at a later time. For example, a wife who feels her husband does not meet
her intimacy needs may sing his praises, and displace anger towards him onto her son, whom she criticises for being inconsiderate and
selfish. From this example, it may be seen that with displacement, strong negative feelings about one partner are directed towards another
person. With splitting and projection, one partner views the other in black-and-white terms: as completely good and others as wholly bad,
or as completely bad and others as wholly good. Whether they are seen as good or bad may vary from time to time. Where couples are
married with children, some family members may be defined as wholly good and others as completely bad. Good qualities and intentions
are projected onto the former, while bad qualities and negative intentions are projected onto the latter. Family members defined as good are
cherished and those defined as bad are scapegoated. A comprehensive list of defence mechanisms is given in Table 4.2 and they are discussed
in detail in Chapter 4.


Problem-maintaining contextual factors
Problem-maintaining behaviour patterns and the belief systems that support these may arise from predisposing factors rooted in constitutional vulnerabilities, stressful features of couple's current wider social context, and adverse family-of-origin experiences (Carr, 2012).
Partners may be predisposed to engage in problem-maintaining behaviour patterns and the belief systems that support these as a result of certain constitutional vulnerabilities (Schmaling & Scher, 2000; Snyder & Whisman, 2003). Common examples are vulnerability to schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, depression and the presence of debilitating somatic states including cancer and chronic pain. A history of illness or injury, learning disabilities or a difficult temperament may also predispose one to problematic beliefs and behaviour patterns.
Stressful or problematic features of couple's current wider social context can predispose them to problem-maintaining beliefs and behaviour patterns (Walsh, 2012). Cultural norms and values, such as extreme patriarchy or a commitment to the use of domestic violence to solve couple's problems, may underlie belief systems that support problem-maintaining behaviour patterns. Belief systems that support problem-maintaining behaviour patterns may be activated by lifecycle transitions, homework role strain and lack of social support.
Problem-maintaining belief systems may also be activated by recent loss experiences such as bereavement or separation, illness, injury, unemployment, moving house or poverty. In couples where one partner is having an ongoing secret romantic affair, the confusion caused by this may also activate belief systems that support problem-maintaining behaviour patterns.
Major family-of-origin stresses that may predispose partners to hold problematic belief systems and fall into problem-maintaining behaviour patterns include bereavement, particularly the death of a parent; separations from parents in childhood through illness or parental divorce; physical, emotional or sexual child abuse or neglect; social disadvantage and poverty; and being brought up in an institution or in multiple foster care placements. Individuals who have experienced these stresses early in life may develop belief systems

that privilege the use of aggression, excessive interpersonal distancing, excessive interpersonal closeness or a chaotic unpredictable
relational style in solving relationship problems (Walsh, 2012).
Family-of-origin parent-child socialisation experiences that may predispose individuals to hold problematic belief systems and engage in
problem-maintaining behaviour patterns include insecure attachment and authoritarian, permissive, neglectful or inconsistent parenting.
Included here also are parenting styles that involve little parent-child interaction and intellectual stimulation and scapegoating (Newman
& Newman, 2015). Family-of-origin parental problems that may predispose individuals to hold problematic belief systems and engage in
problem-maintaining behaviour patterns include parental psychological problems such as depression, parental drug or alcohol misuse,
parental criminality, couple's discord or violence, and general family disorganisation (Newman & Newman, 2015). All of these non-optimal
socialisation experiences may give rise to the development of belief systems that in later life lead individuals to repeat these type of
problematic relationships with their partners.
The three-column exception formulation model
To aid the processes of hypothesising about exceptions and formulating these, ideas from many schools of therapy and findings from studies
of resilience have been integrated into a three-column exception formulation model, presented in Table 6.2 (Carr, 2011; Masten, 2013).
Exceptional behaviour patterns
Hypotheses and formulations about exceptional behaviour patterns include elements suggested by the literature on strengths and resilience
(Carr, 2011; Masten, 2013). They include a description of what happened before, during and after the problem was expected to occur
but did not. Commonly, the exceptional pattern will also include positive feelings. These offer clues as to how the exceptional pattern
may be strengthened. For example, in the exception formulation given in Figure 6.2, the good feelings that followed cooperation offered


a reason for James and Sarah to cooperate more in future. Exceptional behaviour patterns are often characterised by effective problem
solving and clear communication. They usually involve a higher rate of positive and supportive rather than negative and critical exchanges
between partners. A clear expression of needs, particularly attachment needs, a degree of psychological intimacy and greater balance in the
distribution of power (within the cultural constraints of the family's ethnic reference group) are common features of exceptional behaviour
patterns. Exceptional behaviour patterns often involve emotional support and flexibility about rules, roles and routines. Within professional
networks, exceptions tend to occur more commonly when there is good inter-professional coordination and cooperation between families
and professionals.
Table 6.2 Three-column exception formulation model for systemic couple therapy
Contexts
Constitutional
• Physical health
• High IQ
• Easy temperamentContextual
• Good social support network
• Low family stress
• Balanced home and work roles
Belief systems
• Acceptance of the problem
• Acceptance of a systemic framing of the problem
• Commitment to resolving the problem
• Empowering beliefs about personal competence to solve
the problem
• Empowering beliefs about problems and solutions
relevant to the presenting problem
Behaviour patterns
• The sequence of events that
occurs in those exceptional
circumstances where the
problem or symptom was
expected to occur but does
not occur
• The feelings and emotions
that accompany these

• Moderate or high socio-
economic status
• Empowering cultural norms
and valuesHistorical
• Positive family-of-origin
experiences
• Positive family-of-origin
parent-child relationships
• Secure attachment
• Authoritative parenting
• Clear communication
• Flexible family organisation
• Good parental adjustment
• Parents had good marital
relationship
• Successful experiences of
coping with problems
• Beliefs about the advantages of problem resolution
outweigh beliefs about the negative consequences of
change and the negative events that may be avoided by
maintaining the status quo
• Empowering beliefs about marital and other family
relationships, particularly loyalty beliefs
• Benign beliefs about the characteristics or intentions of
partners and other network members
• Optimistic attributional style (internal, global, stable,
intentional attributions for productive behaviour and
situational attributions for problem behaviour)
• Healthy defence mechanisms1.Self-
observation2.Humour3.Self-assertion4.Sublimation
behaviours, particularly
positive feelings or payoffs
• Patterns involving effective
solutions and good
problem-solving skills
• Patterns involving clear
communication
• Patterns involving high
rates of positive exchanges
and low rates of negative
exchanges
• Patterns involving clear
expression of attachment
needs
• Patterns supporting marital
intimacy
• Patterns supporting marital
power sharing
• Emotionally supportive
(rather than enmeshed)

Note: Based on Carr, A. (2012). Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice (Third Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
or disengaged) behaviour
patterns
• Flexible behaviour (not
rigid or chaotic) patterns
• Patterns including good
coordination among
involved professionals and
family members

Exceptional belief systems
Exceptional non-problematic behaviour patterns may be supported by a wide variety of positive belief systems (Carr, 2011). These belief
systems always involve acceptance rather than denial of the problem and a willingness to accept responsibility for contributing to problem
resolution. Commitment to resolving the problem and conviction that one is competent to do so are common features of these belief systems.
When partners hold useful and empowering beliefs about the nature of the problem and its resolution, exceptions may also occur. The
occurrence of exceptional behaviour patterns may be associated with the development of the belief that the advantages of resolving the
problem outweigh the costs of change. Clients may construct narratives in which once-feared consequences associated with their presenting
problems come to be seen as not so dreadful after all. Exceptions may occur when partners endorse positive and empowering beliefs about

their relationship and about their role in the family. This may include a realisation of how much partners care for each other and how
important it is to be loyal to one's marriage or relationship.
Exceptions may also occur when partners develop benign beliefs about the intentions and characteristics of each other and come to view
them as good people who are doing their best in a tough situation rather than vindictive people who are out to persecute them. An optimistic
attributional style may also underpin exceptional, non-problematic behaviour patterns.
When exceptional behaviour patterns occur, sometimes they are associated with the use of healthy defence mechanisms to manage
anxiety arising from conflicting desires to follow a course of action but also to avoid rejection or attack from others. Healthy defence
mechanisms include self-observation, looking at the humorous side of the situation, being assertive about having one's needs met, and
sublimation of unacceptable desires into socially acceptable channels such as work, art or sport. A full list of healthy defence mechanisms is
given in Table 4.2 and they are discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
Contextual factors associated with resilience
Exceptional behaviour patterns and the productive belief systems that support these arise from protective factors that foster resilience (Carr,
2011; Masten, 2013). These protective factors may be rooted in partners' constitutional characteristics, the couple's broader social context
or their historical family-of-origin experiences. Important personal characteristics that contribute to resilience are physical health, high
intelligence and easy temperament.
A good social support network including friends and members of the extended family and low extra-familial stress enhance a couple's
chances of resolving the problems they bring to therapy. Well-balanced home and work roles, moderate or high socio-economic status and
empowering cultural norms and values also contribute to resilience in the face of adversity.
Good parent-child relationships characterised by secure attachment, authoritative parenting and clear communication in the family
of origin foster later resilience and strength. Successful experiences of coping with problems in the family of origin and the current

relationship, flexible organisation in the family of origin, good parental adjustment and a positive relationship between parents in the family
of origin may also engender later resilience.
Stages of ISCT
In ISCT, to help couples cope with symptoms and resolve problems, the overall strategy is to work cooperatively with them to formulate
their difficulties and exceptional episodes (where their difficulties were expected to occur but did not using the three-column models
outlined earlier). Once this has been achieved, treatment goals are set and a therapy plan developed which aims to increase the occurrence
of exceptions, disrupt problematic behaviour patterns, transform problematic belief systems and address problem-maintaining contextual
factors.
However, couple therapy is not that straightforward. Sometimes couples have difficulty engaging in therapy. In the example that opened
this chapter, Sarah and James probably would not have attended therapy at all without careful planning about who to invite to the initial
sessions and what the focus of these meetings should be. Furthermore, many couples show marked improvement following assessment
only. That is, once they develop a shared understanding of their difficulties and exceptional situations where their problems were expected
to occur but did not, they spontaneously avoid problematic interactions and engage in exceptional non-problematic interactions instead.
Finally, some couples come to therapy with one problem, such as depression or anxiety, and when this is resolved request therapy for
other difficulties such as sexual problems. To address these various challenges, within ISCT the process of therapy is conceptualised as a
developmental stage-wise process.
The framework set out in Figure 6.4 outlines the stages of ISCT from the initial reception of a referral letter to the point where the case is
closed (Carr, 2012). The first stage is concerned with planning, the second with engagement and assessment, the third with treatment, and
the fourth with disengagement or recontracting for further intervention. At each stage, key tasks must be completed before progression to


the next stage occurs. Failure to complete the tasks of a given stage in sequence or skipping a stage may jeopardise the consultation process.
For example, attempting to conduct an assessment without first contracting for assessment may lead to cooperation difficulties if the couple
find the assessment procedures arduous or threatening. Failure to complete assessment before treatment compromises decision making
about goal setting and selecting specific therapy strategies. Therapy is a recursive process insofar as it is possible to move from the final stage
of one episode to the first stage of the next. What follows is a description of the stages of therapy and the tasks involved in each.
Stage 1. Planning
In the first stage of therapy the main tasks are to plan who to invite to the assessment sessions and what to ask them.
Planning whom to invite
To make a plan about whom to invite to assessment sessions, find out from the referral letter or through telephone contact with the
referrer who is involved with the problem and who is most concerned that the couple engage in treatment (i.e. who the main customer is).
Then invite the couple and the customer to an intake assessment meeting. In some cases, this will be straightforward. For example, where
both partners want a problem resolved such as depression or relationship difficulties, the couple are the customer. In other cases, where
probation, social services or some other statutory agency is concerned about the case, or where adult children are concerned about a parental
problem such as alcohol abuse, the customer, who in these instances is usually not a member of the couple, and the couple are invited to the
first interview. In the example that opened this chapter, the information in the referral letter and a phone conversation with the referring
social worker suggested that the referrer was the main customer, and so was invited to the initial meeting at which a contract for assessment
was established. If the referrer had not been invited, we would have expected the couple not to have attended the intake interview, or to have
attended but resisted the assessment process. To avoid these problems, the referrer was invited to both arrange the couple's attendance at the


interview and to participate in the session by explaining why she had made the referral and the consequences for the couple of participating
in therapy or not doing so.
STAGE 1
PLANNING
1.1. Planning whom to invite
1.2. Planning the agenda
STAGE 2
ASSESSMENT
2.1. Contracting for assessment
2.2. Completing the assessment and
formulation
2.3. Alliance building
2.4. Formulation and feedback
STAGE 3
TREATMENT
3.1. Setting goals and contracting for
treatment
3.2. Participating in treatment
3.3. Managing resistance
STAGE 4
DISENGAGEMENT OR
RECONTRACTING
4.1. Fading out sessions
4.2. Discussing permanence and the
change process
4.3. Relapse management
4.4. Framing disengagement as an
episode in a relationship

Figure 6.4 Stages of systemic couple therapy
Note: Based on Carr, A. (2012). Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice (Third Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
Planning what to ask: agenda setting
If the referrer's concerns are vague and there is any degree of ambiguity about who the main customer for therapy is, the following questions
may be asked, both in a preliminary telephone contact with the referrer and at the outset of the intake interview: 'What is the main
problem that led to the referral? Who is most concerned that the problem be addressed now?' The next set of questions to ask are those that
allow hypotheses based on preliminary three-column formulations of problems and exceptions to be checked. These questions should cover
behaviour patterns, belief systems and specific contextual factors. The third set of questions should cover the couple's personal and family
background, so that unanticipated contextual factors of relevance to a more accurate formulation of the problem may be identified. Prepare
a list of lines of questioning to follow and refer to these throughout the assessment sessions.
Stage 2. Assessment
In the second stage the three main tasks are (1) establishing a contract for assessment, (2) completing the assessment and formulation and
(3) building a therapeutic alliance.
Contracting for assessment
Contracting for assessment involves the therapist and clients clarifying expectations and reaching an agreement to work together. Begin by
explaining the referral route, for example:
'I thought to start I would explain my understanding of how you were referred here and check if that fits with your understanding. Dr
Randell wrote to me and said that you were all concerned about Michael's depression. She took the view that you were both affected by this

and so both of you might be able to help with solving the problem. So she referred you here. Is that your understanding of how the referral
came about?'
The next priority is to outline what assessment involves and offer each partner a chance to accept or reject the opportunity to complete the
assessment. Explain the way in which the interviews will be conducted, their duration, and the roles of the team (if a team or a supervisor
behind a one-way screen is involved). For example:
'What we had in mind for today was to invite each of you to give your views on the problem. How you see it. What you think makes it worse
or better. Who is most affected by it. How you think it might be solved. When each of you has given your view, we will take a break. During
the break, I will take some time to think about all that you have said (or to talk with the team about their views of the situation) and then we
can finish up by discussing what to do next. That is, I will be in a position to tell you if you have the type of problem with which we can help
you and if so how we think it would be best to proceed. These meetings usually take an hour or an hour and a half altogether. Can I check with
each of you if you wish to have this meeting right now and if you wish to give your views on the problems that led to you coming here today?'
If a team is involved in the assessment process, clarify their roles. Also if a one-way screen is being used, mention its function. For example:
'In our clinic we have found that it's useful in helping couples solve problems if more than one therapist is involved. But it can be
distracting if more than one of us is here in the interviewing room. So our practice is to work in teams, and for the rest of the team to watch
the interview silently from the other side of that screen. It looks like a mirror, but the team can see us from the other room. Their job is to
keep track of each person's different view of the situation and think about how best to solve the problem. Some members of the team are very
experienced and some (like me) are in training. I will introduce you to them after the break (or now) if that's OK with you?'
If videotaping is used, a written consent form should be signed by both partners. It may also be useful to give a verbal explanation. For
example:

'In our clinic we have found that we can get a clearer understanding of each person's different view of the situation if we video each session
and then review it later. To get this service, you must sign a consent form. The form simply says that you want the video-review service and
understand that the video is confidential and will not be shown to anyone except the clinical team.'
If after a course of therapy a therapist wants to use a tape for training purposes, then it is necessary to request written consent
specifically for this. The audience to which the tape will be shown must be specified on the consent form with reference to local, national or
international training events.
In the contracting meeting, highlight the voluntary nature of the assessment and clarify the limits of confidentiality. Normally, the
contents of sessions are confidential unless there is evidence that a client is a serious threat to themselves or to others. For example, where
there is evidence of suicidal intent or domestic violence, confidentiality may be breached.
Where one or both partners are confused about why they both have been invited for the intake interview when (in their opinion) only one
of them has a problem, such as anxiety or depression, the following rationale may be given:
'Our guess is that both of you are affected by this problem, both of you have views on things that make the problem better or worse, and
both of you may have views on how best to cope with it or resolve it in future. So we thought we might get a better understanding of the
situation by talking to both of you.'
Enquiring about the presenting problem
Once a contract for assessment has been established, each partner may be invited to give their view of the presenting problem, the pattern
of interaction around it, and related belief systems. Ask about the nature, frequency and intensity of the problems; previous successful and
unsuccessful solutions to these problems; and partners' views on the causes of these problems and possible solutions that they suspect may
be fruitful to explore in future. Also ask questions to test specific hypotheses about the presenting problem based on your preliminary three-
column problem formulation.

Questions about problem-maintaining behaviour patterns
Here are some questions that may be useful when enquiring about the presenting problem and the pattern of interaction in which it is
embedded.
Everybody has their own view of the problem. What we are interested in finding out is each person's view. These may all be quite different.
That's OK. We are not looking for the right answer or the absolute truth, just each person's view of the problem.
• So, can you tell us how you see it?
• How did it start?
• How is it now?
• Can you tell me about the last time the problem occurred?
• If I were watching a video of the problem happening, what would I see in the lead-up to it, during it and after it?
• What were you each feeling during these episodes?
• What has made it better or worse?
• How have you tried to solve this problem?
• What solutions have worked in the past and which have not?
• Which solution do you keep trying again and again?
• In your previous attempts to solve this problem, when A said B did you understand what he or she meant?
• In your previous attempts to solve this problem, when X happened did you feel close to or distant from your partner?
• In your previous attempts to solve this problem, when X happened did you feel like you had more power or less power than your partner?
• In your previous attempts to solve this problem, when X happened, did you know what was going to happen next?
• In your previous attempts to solve this problem, when X happened, was the outcome a good thing or a bad thing for you or your partner?
• In your previous attempts to solve this problem, when X happened, did you believe that your partner was on your side or not?

• In your previous attempts to solve this problem, was it clear to you what the plan was for yourself, your partner, the social worker, the
doctor and the probation officer?
• How have you tried to get a joint plan working?
Questions about problem-maintaining belief systems
What follows are some useful formats for questions to ask when interviewing about belief systems that support problem-maintaining
behaviour patterns.
• Is there agreement between you about what the main problem is?
• Who holds the view more strongly that there is a problem?
• What explanation do you give for this problem?
• Is the problem more to do with the person or the situation?
• Has the problem gotten worse or better since you made your appointment to come here? What explanation do you offer for this
improvement, deterioration or stability?
• In the past has the problem been constant or fluctuating?
• How do you explain this stability or fluctuation?
• In the future will you expect the problem to improve, deteriorate or remain stable?
• What explanation do you or others give for this expected change or stability?
• How does your explanation of the problem differ from that of your partner?
• If this problem were improving, what would you both be doing differently?
• If this problem were getting worse, what would you both be doing differently?


• If your mother/father/grandmother/grandfather/priest/rabbi/etc. were here with us, what advice would they give us about managing this
problem?
• What roles should husbands/wives/doctors/social workers/etc. take in dealing with problems like these according to your mother/father/
grandparents/religion/ethnic group?
• There is a downside to everything. What would be the downside to solving this problem? What would you lose?
• We often do one thing to avoid another problem. Just say you or your partner were dealing with this problem as you have been doing to
avoid some other worse situation; what is it you are avoiding?
• To what extent do you believe that you can control this problem and to what extent do you believe it is out of your control?
• To what extent do you believe that your partner can control this problem and to what extent do you believe it is out of his/her control?
• How do you think the problem will be in a year if you keep going as you have been?
• Just say the problem got solved in the next few months, and I met you in a year's time and asked you what exactly had happened, what
story would you tell me?
Questions about predisposing contextual factors
What follows are some useful formats for questions to ask when interviewing about contextual and historical predisposing factors.
• Over the past year, what have been the main changes that have occurred for you and your partner?
• Over the past year, what have been the main pressures on you at home and work?
• Over the past year, who has been most supportive of you and how have they shown this?
• How have you juggled the demands of work and home life over the past year?
• How has your health and that of your partner been over the past year?

• How would this type of situation have been handled in your family of origin?
• Can you describe how a comparable situation was handled in your family of origin?
• Do you believe that any of the challenges or difficulties you faced as a youngster have affected your capacity to cope with the present
problem?
• How would you describe your mother's/father's/carer's relationship with you during your childhood and adolescence?
• How would you describe your mother and father's relationship with each other during your childhood and adolescence?
• How would you describe your mother's/father's way of managing their lives during your childhood and adolescence?
• How would you describe family life (rules, roles and routines) during your childhood and adolescence?
Enquiring about exceptions
Questions about exceptions include those about exceptional circumstances within which the problem does not occur; empowering belief
systems and narratives that underpin these exceptions; and constitutional, contextual and historical factors which are the foundation of
family resilience (deShazer, 1988; deShazer & Dolan, 2007; White, 1995, 2007, 2011).
Questions about exceptional behaviour patterns
The following are useful formats for questions to ask when interviewing about exceptional behaviour patterns.
Tell me about an exceptional situation in which the problem was expected to occur but didn't?
• If I were watching a video of this exception, what would I see in the lead-up to it, during it and after it?
• What were you each feeling during this episode?
• Was there a turning point during this successful exception when you knew that you were going to manage the problem well?
• During this successful episode when you managed the problem well, when A said B did you understand what he or she meant?


• During this successful episode when you managed the problem well, when X happened did you feel close to or distant from your partner?
• During this successful episode when you managed the problem well, when X happened did you feel like you had more power or less power
than your partner?
• During this successful episode when you managed the problem well, when X happened did you know what was going to happen next?
• During this successful episode when you managed the problem well, was the outcome a good thing or a bad thing for you or your partner?
• During this successful episode when you managed the problem well, when X happened did it feel like your partner was on your side?
• During this successful episode when you managed the problem well, was it clear to you what the plan was for yourself, your partner, the
social worker, the doctor and probation officer? How did you all get a joint plan working?
Questions about empowering belief systems
What follows are some useful formats for questions to ask when interviewing about empowering narratives and belief systems.
• What is your explanation for this successful exception in which you managed the problem well?
• Was your success more to do with your efforts, the efforts of your partner or the situation?
• To what extent do you believe that you can make these exceptions happen again and to what extent do you believe this is out of your
control?
• To what extent do you believe that your partner can control these exceptions and to what extent do you believe that they are out of your
partner's control?
• Can you give other examples from the past to show that you or your partner were the main factor in managing this problem?
• In the future if you wanted to create another exceptional event in which you and your partner managed the problem well, what would you
have to do?

Questions about predisposing protective factors and resilience
What follows are some useful formats for questions to ask when interviewing about protective predisposing factors.
• Can you describe a comparable situation in your family of origin, a situation where a problem was unresolved for a long time and then was
managed successfully on one occasion?
• If your mother/father/grandmother/grandfather/priest/rabbi/etc. were here with us, what advice would they give us about making these
exceptions occur again?
• What roles should mothers/fathers/husbands/wives/doctors/social workers/etc. take in making these exceptions happen again according
to your mother/father/grandparents/religion/ethnic group?
• What challenges or difficulties did you face as a youngster that empowered you so that you could manage the present problem so well in
this exceptional situation?
• If I were watching a video of your earlier life, what do you think I would see that would explain how you managed to handle the problem
so well in this exceptional situation?
Developmental history and genogram construction
The process of taking a developmental history and genogram construction may be routinely incorporated into initial couple assessment
sessions (McGoldrick et al., 2008). In taking a couple's developmental history, it can create a positive climate in the session to begin by
enquiring what attracted them to each other and how they met. From there ask about the early years of the relationship and the good times
they shared before their current problems began. Then ask about how the couple handled the various lifecycle stages listed in Figure 1.1 in
Chapter 1, such as having children, managing the process of child-rearing, making space for the couple's relationship and so forth. Enquire

about the way in which each partner noticed the problems developing and any theories they might hold about precipitating factors. Then
for each partner, enquire about their development within their family of origin and how each managed the various lifecycle challenges of
growing up, leaving home, developing a career, and developing relationships prior to their current relationship.
While taking the couple's developmental history, concurrently begin constructing a genogram. A genogram is a family tree that contains
clinically relevant information about family members and their pattern of organisation. Genogram symbols are given in Figure 6.5 and a
checklist of areas to cover in genogram construction is given in Table 6.3. It is useful to construct a genogram in a way that allows partners to
see it as it is drawn. A flip chart or whiteboard may be used to facilitate this. Most of the genogram construction rules are contained in Figure
6.5. Once the genogram contains all important family members, invite partners to include other important details following the checklist in
Table 6.3.
Genogram construction is a good opportunity to pinpoint and label partners' strengths. When asking about strengths, invite partners to
identify and label their own and each other's positive attributes. This often has the impact of raising morale and diminishing hopelessness.
Here are some examples of how to enquire about and label strengths.
• Can you describe the last time you noticed your partner doing X effectively? Would you agree that doing X well is one of his/her strengths?
• Does you partner work hard on some occasions? If so, would you say that being hardworking is one of their strengths?
• Does your partner help at home from time to time? If so, would you say that being kind and helpful are two of his/her strengths?
• Has your partner got a friend that s/he sees from time to time? If so, would you say that s/he is a loyal friend?
• How long have you been in a relationship? How many times have you separated or felt like leaving but not done so? Does this mean that
you are loyal to your partner, that loyalty is one of your strengths?
• You have lived with this problem a long time but you still get up every day and keep going. Does this mean that that you have great stamina,
like a long-distance runner?

• This problem could have caused other couples to break up, but you are still together. Does this mean that you are a strong, united couple?
B. 1960
23y
Female born in 1960 23-year-old male Female problem person Male problem person Female who died in 1990 Pregnancy
M 1980
1992
Couple who married in 1980
Couple cohabiting since 1992
1995
Estranged relationship
Divorced in 1999
Separated in 1995
1999
Close relationship
Conflictual relationship
Close conflictual relationship

A family with two parents,
a son and a daughter
A family with two parents,
and twin daughters
A family with two parents,
a daughter and a foster son

Figure 6.5 Genogram symbols
While it is useful to spend a lot of time asking questions which lead to strengths being labelled, when asking about vulnerabilities,
illnesses and adjustment problems it is less demoralising if these enquiries are brief. One way of keeping such enquiries brief is to ask the
question about each generation or the couple as a whole, rather than each individual. For example:
• Has anyone in this generation had a serious illness or been hospitalised (pointing to the grandparents' generation)?
• Do you know if anyone in this generation had bad nerves or a problem with drink?
• Has anyone in the couple got a really short fuse?
• Has anyone in the family been in serious trouble with the police?
Triangles and complex multigenerational patterns may be identified by first asking questions about alliances. Each partner may be asked
to point out on the nuclear couple part of the genogram:
• Which of you is closest to which other family member?
• Which of you is in disagreement with which other family member?
Table 6.3 Information to include in genograms
People Demographics
• Name
• Age

• Occupation

Transitions
• Births
• Deaths
• Marriages, cohabiting relationships
• Changing households
• Leaving home
• Foster care
• Anniversaries of transitions

Strengths
• Examples of having coped well with problems in the past
• Work and school performance
• Making and maintaining friendships
• Sports and leisure
• Special personal achievements

Vulnerabilities
• Illnesses and hospitalisations
• Psychological adjustment problems

Patterns
Dyadic
Triadic
Complex
• Substance abuse
• Anger control, violence and abuse
• Criminality
• Supportive alliances and coalitions
• Stressful conflicts
• Triangulation where a child is required to take sides with one of two other family members (usually the parents)
• Pathological triangles with denied cross-generational coalitions
• Detouring-attacking triads where the parents express joint anger at the child, associated with conduct problems
• Detouring-protecting triads where parents express joint concern about the child who presents with a psychosomatic or emotional complaint
• Multigenerational dyadic patterns (e.g. mothers and daughters are close in three generations)
• Multigenerational triadic patterns (e.g. triangulation occurs in two generations)

Note: Based on Carr, A. (2000). Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice. Chichester: Wiley.


Multigenerational patterns may be identified by asking about similarities between relationships. For example:
• What relationship in the wider family is most like the relationship between A and B in your own household?
• It looks like sometimes a triangle happened in your house, with A and B joining forces against C. If we go back a generation or across to the
households of aunts and uncles, is there anywhere else that this triangle pattern happens?
Significant supportive or stressful members of the couple's social network should be identified and included on the genogram.
• Outside of the family are there any close friends (neighbours/doctors/professionals) that are important because they are very helpful to
you and so should be on the genogram?
• Are there any people that are important because they cause your family a lot of hassle and so should be on the genogram?
To explore the amount of support or stress associated with extra-familial relationships, some questions are useful in keeping this process
brief:
• Which people in the family or wider network do you see on a daily basis and which do you see infrequently, like just at Christmas and
Easter?
• Are these contacts a hassle or are they something you look forward to?
If one partner looks forward to these contacts more than the other, each partner may be asked of these contacts:
• Who looks forward to them more?

- Who looks forward to them the least?
The management of developmental issues may be enquired about with reference to the frameworks outlined in Chapter 1. Questions may
focus on how well partners managed particular lifecycle stages and transitions from one stage to the next. This offers further opportunities
to pinpoint and label strengths. An example of a genogram for James and Sarah is presented in Figure 6.3, and the way salient aspects of
the genogram were incorporated into the three-column problem and exception formulations has been outlined in the case vignette at the
beginning of this chapter.
Questionnaires and rating scales
The Golombok Rust Inventory of Marital State (GRIMS; Rust et al., 1988) and the Marital Satisfaction Inventory-Revised (MSI-R; Snyder,
1997) are useful self-report instruments for routinely surveying couple's strengths and weaknesses. The Global Assessment of Relational
Functioning scale given in Table 6.4 is a useful, non-intrusive way of rating couple functioning based on an intake interview.
Alliance building
In addition to providing information, the process of assessment also serves as a way for the couple and therapist to build a working alliance.
Building a strong working alliance is essential for valid assessment and effective therapy. All other features of the consultation process
should be subordinate to the working alliance, since without it clients drop out of assessment and therapy or fail to make progress (Carr,
2009). The only exception to this rule is where the safety of a partner or family member is at risk, and in such cases protection takes priority
over alliance building.
Research on common factors that contribute to a positive therapeutic outcome and ethical principles of good practice point to a number
of guidelines which therapists should employ in developing a working alliance (Carr, 2009). Warmth, empathy and genuineness should

characterise the therapist's communication style. The therapist should form a collaborative partnership in which clients are experts on the
specific features of their own relationships and therapists are experts on general scientific and clinical information relevant to the broad
class of problems of which the presenting problem is a specific instance.
Neutrality and acceptance are central to the positioning of the therapist. Each partner in the couple must feel at the end of each session
that the therapist understood, accepted and sympathised with his or her point of view. They must not feel judged or blamed, but rather
experience the therapist as understanding that they were doing their best to manage a frustrating or intolerable situation. This is a
challenging position to adopt, since in most couples sessions both partners blame each other and invite the therapist to take sides with one
or other partner.
Table 6.4 Global Assessment of Relational Functioning Scale
81-100 Overall functioning. The couple is functioning satisfactorily from partners' self-reports and from the perspective of
observers. Problem solving and communication. Agreed routines exist that help meet the needs of the couple. There is
flexibility for change in response to unusual demands or events. Occasional conflicts and stressful transitions are resolved
through effective problem solving and communication. Organisation. There is a shared understanding and agreement about
roles and tasks. Decision making is established for each functional area. There is recognition of the unique characteristics
and merits of each partner. Emotional climate. There is a situationally appropriate optimistic atmosphere. A wide range
of feelings is freely expressed and managed. There is a general atmosphere of warmth, caring and sharing values. Sexual
relations are satisfactory.
61-80
Overall functioning. The functioning of the couple is somewhat unsatisfactory. Over a period of time many but not all
difficulties are resolved without complaints. Problem solving and communication. Daily routines that help meet the needs
of the couple are present. There is some difficulty in responding to unusual demands or events. Some conflicts remain

unresolved but do not disrupt the functioning of the couple. Organisation. Decision making is usually competent, but
efforts to control one another quite often are greater than necessary or are ineffective. There is not always recognition of the
unique characteristics and merits of each partner and sometimes blaming or scapegoating occurs. Emotional climate. A
range of feelings is expressed, but instances of emotional blocking and tension are evident. Warmth and caring are present
but are marred by partners' irritability and frustrations. Sexual relations are reduced or problematic.
41-60 Overall functioning. The couple have occasional times of satisfying and competent functioning together, but clearly
dysfunctional, unsatisfying relationships tend to predominate. Problem solving and communication. Communication
is frequently inhibited by unresolved conflicts that often interfere with daily routines. There is significant difficulty in
adapting to family stresses and transitional change. Organisation. Decision making is only intermittently competent
and effective. Either excessive rigidity or significant lack of structure is evident at these times. Individual needs are often
submerged by one partner's demands. Emotional climate. Pain or ineffective anger or emotional deadness interferes with
family enjoyment. Although there is some warmth and support between partners, it is usually unequally distributed.
Troublesome sexual difficulties are often present.
21-40 Overall functioning. The couple is obviously and seriously dysfunctional. Forms and time periods of satisfactory relating
are rare. Problem solving and communication. Couple's routines do not meet partners' needs. They are grimly adhered
to or blithely ignored. Lifecycle changes generate painful conflict and obviously frustrating failures in problem solving.
Organisation. Decision making is tyrannical or quite ineffective. Partners' unique characteristics are unappreciated or
ignored. Emotional climate. There are infrequent periods of enjoyment of life together. Frequent distancing or open
hostility reflects significant conflicts that remain unresolved and quite painful. Sexual dysfunction is commonplace.
1-20 Overall functioning. The couple has become too dysfunctional to retain continuity of contact and attachment. Problem
solving and communication. Couple routines for eating, sleeping, entering and leaving the home, etc. are negligible.
Partners do not know each other's schedules. There is little effective communication among partners. Organisation. Couples
are not organised to respect personal boundaries or accept personal responsibilities within the relationship. Partners may be
physically endangered, injured or sexually assaulted. Emotional climate. Despair and cynicism are pervasive. There is little

attention to the emotional needs of others. There is almost no sense of attachment, commitment or concern for each other's
welfare.
Note: Based on American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition-Text Revision, DSM-IV-TR, pp. 814-
816). Washington, DC: APA.
Assessment should be conducted from a position of respectful curiosity, in which the therapist continually strives to uncover new
information about the problem and potential solutions and invites clients to consider the implications of viewing their difficulties as
determined by multiple factors and from multiple different perspectives. This positioning counters the couple's attempt to find the 'one
cause', the 'person who is to blame', or the 'single right answer'.
An invitational approach should be adopted in which clients are invited (not directed) to participate in assessment and treatment. Thus,
if partners cannot follow through on homework assignments or activities in sessions, they do not feel guilty or blamed for not doing as
directed.
There should be a balanced focus on strengths and resilience on the one hand and on problems and constraints on the other. This
positioning fosters optimism without colluding with denial.
There should be an attempt to match the way therapy is conducted to the client's readiness to change, since to do otherwise may jeopardise
the therapeutic alliance. For example, if a therapist focuses on offering technical assistance with problem solving to clients who are still only
contemplating change and needing help exploring the pros and cons of change, conflict will arise because the clients will feel coerced into
action by the therapist and probably not follow through on therapeutic tasks, and the therapist may feel disappointed that the clients are
showing resistance.
There should be an acknowledgement that clients and therapists inadvertently bring to the working alliance attitudes, expectations,
emotional responses and interactional routines from early significant caregiving and care-receiving relationships. These transference and

countertransference reactions, if unrecognised, may compromise therapeutic progress and so should be addressed when resistance to
therapeutic change occurs. Methods for managing resistance will be discussed later.
Formulation and feedback
Once a formulation has been constructed, feedback is given to the couple about the formulation and treatment options are considered.
During feedback, use all opportunities to label the couple's strengths, to build hope. Match the level of detail in giving feedback to the
cognitive abilities and the emotional readiness of each member of the couple. It is also important to empathise with each partner's position
when outlining the way in which the problem appears to have evolved. Usually partners are well intentioned but under stress, and without
adequate information they inadvertently contribute to problem development or maintenance. In the process of feeding back some or all
of the formulation to couples, in order to maintain a good working alliance, regularly check that they have understood and accepted the
formulation so far. Once the couple have understood and accepted the formulation, move on to goal setting. Here is an example of how
feedback was given to James and Sarah, the couple mentioned in the opening vignette.
'Over the last two sessions we have worked together to try to understand the difficulties that brought you here. These problems are
complex and challenging. I have been impressed with the way you have faced up to them. A lot of other couples would have thrown in the
towel by now. I've been impressed that you have stuck together through this process. Even though things are sometimes very rough in your
lives, you are loyal to each other and to your children and seem to want to work things out. At this stage I can let you know my view, my
assessment of the situation. Then you have a chance to think about this and make a decision about whether to move on to treatment or not.
Should I tell you my assessment of the situation now?
'It's clear to me that your difficulties follow a definite pattern that involves both of you, and it's hard to know where it begins or ends. But
for the sake of simplicity, let's say the pattern begins with a disagreement, in which James, you ask Sarah to do something for you because
you feel stressed out, like calm the children down or treat you in a romantic way. But maybe you ask a bit aggressively because you think she's


going to say no. And then you, Sarah, find it hard to cooperate with James because you feel like you have enough on your plate already. You're
overloaded. Then James, you criticise Sarah, because it feels to you like she's punishing you, and that's not fair because you're doing your best.
Then, you, Sarah, fight back. But this gets you riled up. Sometimes you notice this, and hear your heart beating too fast and think you might
have a heart attack. On those occasions you have a panic attack, a fairly scary experience. James, when you see this, you sometimes feel like
it's your fault Sarah is having the attack and you then usually back off. Then there often is a gap of a few days where you are not on speaking
terms. And then gradually the ice thaws between you. But the misunderstanding is not cleared up. So, the next time the pressure is on both
of you, and James, you ask Sarah to do something for you, the pattern repeats. I just want to check that pattern out with you?
'The other thing we have talked about over the last two sessions are exceptions, times when the pattern that makes you both feel so bad
should have happened but didn't. There are times, James, when you help Sarah. Like when she is having difficulty with the children, or the
car, or cooking dinner, or doing some other jobs. When you help her, she smiles at you or says something kind, and you both feel good. These
exceptions give me hope that you may be able to sort out your difficulties. Can I check that you both recognise these exceptional patterns I'm
talking about?
'Now from the stuff you've told me about your families, I suspect that for each of you, your part in the problem patterns and the exceptions
comes in part from things you learned in the families you grew up in. But we can talk about that at another time ... Right now, if you agree
that these patterns are a useful way of looking at your problem and exceptions to it, the question is would you like to meet for a few more
sessions to work on changing the problem pattern and bringing more of the exception patterns into your lives? You can let me know later
what your answer is to that question.'
Stage 3. Treatment
In some cases, the process of assessment and formulation releases a couple's natural problem-solving skills and they resolve the problem
themselves. In other cases assessment leads on to contracting for an episode of treatment.

Setting goals and contracting for treatment
The contracting process involves establishing goals and outlining a plan to work towards these in light of the formulation. Clearly defined,
realistic goals that are accepted by both partners and that are perceived to be moderately challenging are crucial for effective therapy. Ask
questions like this to set long-term goals:
• Imagine it's a year from now and the problem is solved. It's a Monday morning at your house. What is happening? Give me a blow-by-blow
description of what everyone is doing.
Ask the following types of questions to set short-term goals:
• What is the smallest thing that would have to change for you to know you were moving in the right direction to solve this difficult
problem?
• Just say this problem was halfway better. What would be different about the way you talked to each other?
Ideally progress towards goals should be assessed in an observable or quantitative way. For many problems, progress may be assessed using
frequency counts, for example, the number of arguments or the number of compliments. Ratings of internal states, moods and beliefs are
useful ways of quantifying progress towards less observable goals. Here are some examples of scaling questions:
• You say that on a scale of 1 to 10 your mood is now about 3. How many points would it have to go up the scale for you to know you were
beginning to recover?
• Last week on a scale of 1 to 10, you said your belief in X was 4. How strongly do you believe X now?'


When couples have set some treatment goals, a contract for further therapy may be set.
There are pros and cons to continuing with this work to try and achieve the sorts of goals you have been talking about. You may want to
go it alone from here on. Or you may want to attend some more meetings here with us. To benefit from therapy, you would need to attend
about 10 more sessions. That involves a lot of time and effort. Also there is only a two out of three chance that you will benefit from therapy.
So it's not a guaranteed solution and it's hard to say right now if you will be one of the lucky ones who can benefit. On the other hand, you are
both good at this sort of work. You have a knack for making sense of your problems in a very thoughtful way and seem to be able to use these
meetings well, so these two things suggest to me that you might benefit from further meetings. Should we discuss how you want to proceed
now?
Participating in treatment
Treatment may involve interventions that aim to alter problem-maintaining behaviour patterns; interventions that focus on the
development of new belief systems that open up possibilities for problem resolution; and interventions that focus on predisposing factors.
Some interventions in each of these categories are listed in Table 6.5. As a broad principle of practice, it is probably most efficient to
begin with interventions that aim to alter problem-maintaining behaviour patterns and the belief systems that underpin these, unless
there is good reason to believe that such interventions will be ineffective because of the influence of constitutional vulnerabilities, broader
contextual factors or historical family-of-origin issues. Only if interventions that focus on problem-maintaining behaviour patterns and
belief systems are ineffective or clearly inappropriate is it efficient to move towards interventions which target predisposing factors.
Select interventions that fit with a couple's goals, the three-column formulation of the problem, and the exception formulation. Select
interventions that are compatible with the couple's readiness for change. Where clients are ambivalent or uncommitted, these issues rather
than action planning should be the focus of treatment. Interventions that are compatible with the couple's rules, roles, routines, belief
systems and culture are probably preferable to those that are incompatible. Interventions that make best use of the couple's strengths


are probably better than those that do not fully exploit the couple's own problem-solving and self-healing resources to the full. It is also
preferable to select interventions that make best use of the therapist's or team's skills.
Table 6.5 Interventions in systemic couple therapy to address factors within three-column formulations
Contexts
Addressing constitutional factors
• Psychoeducation about condition
• Facilitating adherence to medication
regime
Addressing contextual issues
• Network meetings
• Changing roles
• Building support
• Rituals for mourning losses
Exploring secrets
Addressing family-of-origin issues
Belief systems
Reframing problems
• Frame problems in interactional
terms
• Frame problems in solvable terms
• Frame intentions in positive terms
Pinpointing strengths
• Find unnamed obvious strengths
• Attribute them to clients as
defining characteristics
Relabelling
Behaviour patterns
Creating a therapeutic context
• Contract
• Lay ground rules
• Facilitate turn-taking
• Manage time and space
Facilitating expression of unmet
attachment needs
• Distinguish primary (vulnerable/
adaptive) emotions from secondary
(hard/maladaptive) emotions


• Facilitate exploration of
transgenerational patterns, scripts,
myths and relationship habits
• Facilitate re-experiencing, expressing
and integrating emotions from family-
of-origin experiences which underpin
destructive relationship habits
• Coach clients to reconnect with cut-off
parental figures
• Find negatively labelled
behaviours
• Relabel them in positive, non-
blaming terms
Presenting multiple perspectives
• Split messages
• Reflecting team practice
• Facilitate intense expression and
reception of primary emotions and
attachment needs
Changing rates of positive and negative
behaviour
• Behaviour exchange
• Acceptance building
Problem solving and communication skills
Externalising problems and building training
on exceptions
• Separate the problem from the
person
• Identify and amplify exceptions
including pre-therapy
improvements
• Involve network members
• Link the current life exceptions to
the past and future
• Communication skills training
• Problem-solving skills training
Tasks to change behaviour patterns between
sessions
• Symptom monitoring
• Restraint
• Managing graded challenges
• Practising symptoms

• Build a new positive narrative
based on the series of exceptions
• Self-regulation
Note: Based on Carr, A. (2012). Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice (Third Edition). Chichester: Wiley.

Behaviour-focused interventions
Interventions that aim to directly disrupt or replace problem-maintaining behaviour patterns include the following:
• Creating a therapeutic context
• Facilitating emotive expression of attachment needs
• Changing rates of positive and negative behaviour
• Communication and problem-solving skills training
• Using tasks between sessions to change behaviour patterns.

Creating a therapeutic context
In every session, the process of creating a context for therapeutic work is an intervention that disrupts problem-maintaining behaviour
patterns. In every session the contract for therapeutic work is re-established either implicitly or explicitly. Turn-taking in speaking and
listening is practised and the therapist, in collaboration with the couple and the agency, arrange for the session to take place for a period of
uninterrupted time in an appropriate space to achieve agreed goals. However, in the first session these issues are addressed very explicitly
(as described earlier in the section on contracting for assessment). In later sessions, pay regular attention to creating a therapeutic context

by structuring the sessions in a way that promotes collaborative problem solving and that maintains a sense of fairness. A useful structure is
to open each session by inviting participants to give a brief account of progress from their perspective. Note specific issues to be discussed in
the heart of the session. Sometimes it is helpful to take a break before concluding the session to plan how the session might most usefully be
concluded. Sessions may be concluded by simply inviting participants to continue the in-session conversation in the next session. In other
instances, the strengths and commitment clients have shown during the session may be highlighted. Sometimes it is useful to conclude
sessions by reframing clients' problems or highlighting multiple different perspectives. In still other instances, sessions may conclude by
inviting clients to complete specific tasks for specific reasons before the next session.
Facilitating emotive expression of attachment needs
Where clients had insecure attachment styles in their families of origin, this may be replicated in their adult relationships. They may fear
that their partners will not meet their attachment needs for companionship, support, satisfaction, security and safety. They may anticipate
that if they let their partners know that they feel sad, frightened or in need of companionship, they will be rejected. This anticipation
of rejection and the pain it would involve prevents them from letting their partners know that they feel vulnerable and needy. Instead,
they assume rejection would occur and express anger at their partners because of this often erroneous expectation. However, their hostile
attitude often elicits rejection from their partners and so their fears become a self-fulfilling prophecy. In such circumstances, an intervention
central to emotion-focused couple therapy is appropriate (Johnson, 2004). Couples are helped to distinguish between primary and secondary
emotional responses. Primary emotional responses include fear, sadness, disappointment, emotional hurt and vulnerability. Anger and
resentment are secondary emotional responses that occur when there is an expectation that attachment needs may not be met. The couple's
problem may be reframed as one involving the miscommunication of primary attachment needs and related disappointments. Partners
may be invited to express their attachment needs and related primary emotional responses in full and forceful ways, but not to give vent to
their secondary emotional responses through blaming or guilt induction. When primary emotions such as sadness and disappointment are

expressed, the partner listening to the emotional expression of attachment needs commonly experiences empathy and is moved to go some
way towards meeting the other's attachment needs. If in a number of sessions the therapist can facilitate an intensification and repetition
of such primary expressions of attachment needs, these may come to replace secondary emotional responses, such as anger and resentment.
Changing rates of positive and negative behaviour
Behavioural exchange techniques may be used to help flexible couples increase positive things that they do for each other. Facilitating
emotional acceptance can increase positive exchanges and decrease negative exchanges in rigid couples by helping partners react to non-
preferred behaviours with acceptance rather than negative responses (Jacobson & Christensen, 1996).
Behavioural exchange
Where couples are strongly motivated to change, behavioural exchange interventions that directly aim to increase rates of positive
exchanges between couples are appropriate. The rationale given is that happy couples spontaneously engage in five times more positive
than negative exchanges, so planning an increase in positive exchanges will enhance relationship satisfaction. Behavioural exchange
interventions involve generating lists of events that are valued by partners and arranging for them to do these things for each other in a way
that is optimally reinforcing for both parties. This means in practice that 'givers' must be perceived to be giving freely and giving something
that is valued by 'receivers', and 'receivers' must communicate that 'gifts' received were valued and that they are grateful. One option is to
ask each partner to generate their own list of valued events, exchange the lists, and then carry out one or more events each day as a 'gift' for
their partner and notice the impact of this on relationship satisfaction. A more subtle option (Jacobson & Christensen, 1996) is for partners
to generate what they believe their spouse's wish list to be. With this option, the therapist works with each partner while the other partner
is an observer and helps to brainstorm all the things that they could do to make their partner happy. This creates a context within which
'receivers' hear 'givers' in conversation with the therapist focusing exclusively on the receivers' needs and how these might be met through


acts of generosity and caring. Then partners are invited, between sessions, to choose one or more items from their list that are not too taxing
for them, and freely 'give' to their partners without mentioning that they are doing so, with a view to increasing the receivers' relationship
satisfaction. A discussion of the impact of the task on couple's satisfaction is reserved until the next therapy session, where the 'givers' get
feedback that can help them refine future attempts. If couples have difficulty generating pleasing things they can do for their partners,
the Spouse Observation Checklist may be used (Wills et al., 1974). This 409-item inventory covers a wide variety of activities in areas
such as companionship, affection, sex, consideration, communication, activities with others, children and finances. Guidelines for giving
homework assignments in ways that maximise the chances of adherence are given in Chapter 3 on CBT.
Acceptance building
With acceptance building, couples are helped to pinpoint within their problem-maintaining behaviour patterns instances where one
partner responds negatively to another because they want their partner to change, and to note how this leads to a symmetrical escalation
of negative behaviour. They are then invited to disrupt this pattern by building acceptance (Jacobson & Christensen, 1996). Four strategies
are used for acceptance building, and these include empathic joining around the problem; detachment from the problem; tolerance building;
and developing self-care skills. In the first two strategies, couples are helped to join forces against a perplexing dilemma such as whether to
have more or less closeness in a relationship when partners have very different preferred levels of closeness. In the second two strategies,
clients are desensitised to their partners' difficult behaviour or helped to develop self-care skills to cope with it.
With empathic joining around the problem, invite each partner to say how the problem hurts them or makes life difficult for them and
how this experience of being hurt makes them try to change their partner's behaviour in a coercive or destructive way. Then empathise
with each partner's position in a compassionate way and show how their difficulty accepting each other maintains their problem behaviour
pattern. By modelling empathy and compassion you may promote acceptance. For example:

'You seem to be involved in a situation where anything you do to try to make things better, makes them worse. Mary, when you need to feel
supported by John, but suspect he wants to keep his distance, you ask him for support in a way that conveys that you are disappointed that
he has let you down in the past. I guess you do this because you expect he will let you down again and you never ask for his support unless
you really need it. John, you really need your space and to feel appreciated. Each time Mary asks you for support, in that way, you feel like she
is criticising and not understanding you and all you do for the family, so even before she's finished saying what's on her mind, you launch a
counter-attack or withdraw. The outcome of this usually is, Mary, you get little support and John, you feel even more criticised. It's clear you
both care about each other a lot and fall into this trap because you are both trying to change the other person to be more supportive or less
critical. So there is an opportunity here to make things different. But it's a hard road. It involves accepting that you face a common problem
here. You care about each other. You want to support each other. You each want to be supported. But it's very hard for you to find a way to do
this that does not end up in this trap.'
When building emotional acceptance through detachment, the key is to invite the couple to describe the problem as separate from either
partner. So, for example, couples may be invited in all future conversations to consider the problem (such as depression, bipolar disorder,
anxiety, episodes of conflict) as a detached entity which both of them have to cope with or solve. Invite couples to externalise the problem in
all conversations about how to cope with or resolve it. It may be helpful for them to set up a chair or object in the therapy room or at home to
represent the problem. Whenever the couple return to viewing each other as adversaries and blaming each other, remind them that they are
team who are dealing with a detached or externalised problem.
When building emotional acceptance through strengthening tolerance, couples may be invited to enact a problematic behaviour pattern,
and tolerate the pain it causes them so that they will have practised this skill for managing relapses. This tolerance-strengthening process
is like desensitising couples to each other's negative behaviour by exposing them to it in a controlled way, just as people with phobias are
gradually exposed to feared situations. When this is done within sessions, invite couples to 'rehearse' how they will tolerate each other's


negativity by having a typical conflict within therapy. When giving this as a homework assignment, invite couples to 'pretend' to have a
typical conflict without informing their partners, and notice how they tolerate the negative emotions it elicits in them.
When building emotional acceptance through self-care, invite partners to explore ways of coping with their spouse's negative behaviours
and getting their needs met in ways that do not involve their partners. Self-care skills include being able to pinpoint problem-maintaining
patterns as soon as they begin, developing humour and assertiveness skills as ways of communicating that they have noticed the 'same old
pattern' happening again, and consciously withdrawing from these problem-maintaining behaviour patterns as soon as they begin, in a
non-punitive way. Self-care also involves developing self-soothing skills such as relaxation or meditation to manage arousal and social skills
to manage the need for social support from others.
Communication and problem-solving skills training
Communication and problem-solving skills training equips couples with the skills necessary to talk in a clear way about new problems as
they arise and then to develop plans for solving these problems cooperatively (Jacobson & Christensen, 1996). Give this rationale to couples
before inviting them to participate in this type of skills training.
Communication
Communication skills training involves coaching clients through modelling, role-play and feedback in fair turn-taking, communicating
messages clearly, directly and congruently to their partners; checking that one has been understood; listening in an empathic manner;
paraphrasing partners' messages; and checking the accuracy of such paraphrases. With communication skills training, typical mistakes
include interrupting before the other person has finished, failing to summarise what the other person said accurately, attributing negative
malicious intentions to the other person, failing to check that the message was accurately sent, failing to check that the message has been
accurately received, blaming and sulking.

Problem solving
Problem-solving skills training involves coaching couples through modelling, role-play and feedback in defining large daunting problems as
a series of small solvable problems and brainstorming solutions for each problem; evaluating the pros and cons of these; selecting one; jointly
implementing it; reviewing progress; and modifying the selected solution if it is ineffective or celebrating success if the problem is resolved.
When couples are observed trying to solve emotionally laden problems, often the first pitfall they slide into is that of problem definition.
Many clients need to be coached in how to translate a big vague problem into a few small, specific problems. A second pitfall involves trying
to solve more than one problem at a time. A third area of difficulty is helping couples to hold off on evaluating the pros and cons of any
one solution until as many solutions as possible have been listed. This is important, since premature evaluating can stifle the production of
creative solutions.
Coaching
Train couples in using one skill at a time. In each instance offer couples an intellectual understanding of the skills. Model the skills using an
emotionally neutral example. Then invite clients to try using the skills to discuss a neutral topic in the session. Let the episode run for 5 or 10
minutes, and take notes of various difficulties that occur. Often couples need to be coached out of bad habits such as negative mind-reading,
blaming and sulking. The challenge in effective skills training is to help the clients avoid their habitual mistakes by praising them for gradual
approximations to good communication. Criticising clients for making mistakes tends to threaten the integrity of the therapeutic alliance
and has little impact on skill refinement. Through giving feedback on each trial, couples move gradually to skill mastery. Once couples can
use skills to address emotionally neutral topics, invite them to use them to discuss an emotionally 'hot' topic. When mastery has been
achieved with 'hot' topics in therapy, offer skills practice with emotionally neutral topics as homework. Only when couples have mastered

addressing neutral topics successfully at home should they be invited to address emotionally 'hot' topics as homework. A time and place free
of distractions should be agreed and a time limit of no more than 20 minutes set for initial communication assignments and 40 minutes
when skills are better developed. Where couples with chronic problems successfully resolve a difficulty, either in therapy or as homework,
a vital part of the coaching process is to help them celebrate this victory. Here is one way to offer the invitation to do a communications
training homework task:
Schedule a specific time and place for the conversation. This should be a time when there is no pressure to be elsewhere and a place in
which there are no distractions. Discuss one topic at a time; begin with an emotionally neutral topic. Later, you can move on to using these
skills to talk about 'hot' issues. Take turns fairly. Make the speaking turns brief.
When speaking, your main goal is to help your partner understand your point of view. Decide the exact points you want to say. Organise
them logically. Say them clearly and then check that you have been understood. When you are certain your partner has understood you
accurately, allow space for a reply. When you are speaking, state your points without attacking, blaming or sulking. Frame your points as
congruent I-statements. For example, 'I feel angry about what happened between us earlier today.' This I-statement is better than a You-
statement like 'You started attacking me again today like you always do just to get at me.'
'When you are listening, your main goal is to find out exactly what your partner thinks. Listen without interruption and when your
partner has finished speaking, summarise their key points. Check that you have understood what they have said accurately before you reply.
When you are listening, avoid composing your reply, defending yourself, or attacking your partner. Try to listen without judging what is
being said, and avoid negative mind-reading where you attribute bad intentions to your partner.
'You have shown that you can do all this here in therapy, so the invitation is to try to do this at home. We will review how you got on next
week.'

Tasks between sessions
Couples may be invited to complete tasks between sessions that aim to disrupt or replace problem-maintaining behaviour patterns (Carr,
2012). Among the more widely used tasks are symptom monitoring, restraint, managing graded challenges, practising symptoms and self-
regulation.
Symptom monitoring
For many difficulties, inviting couples to regularly record information decreases problem behaviour and symptoms and increases problem-
solving behaviour. Where appropriate, invite clients to routinely record information about the main presenting problems, the circumstances
surrounding their occurrence, completion of homework tasks, and adherence to biomedical treatment regimes. Intensity ratings, frequency
counts, durations and other features of problems or symptoms may be recorded where appropriate. Intrapsychic and interpersonal events
that happen before, during and after problems may also be noted. When inviting clients to use a monitoring system, the chances of them
cooperating is better if a simple and structured system is given, such as those described in Chapter 3 on CBT. Review monitoring charts
regularly and invite couples to speculate on the reasons for changes in problems and related events.
Restraint
Where couples commonly make their problems worse by trying to solve them in their habitual ways, they may be advised to move slowly
and restrain themselves from trying to change their situation too quickly, since this may have unexpected negative consequences (Shoham
et al., 2008).


Managing graded challenges
In cases where clients' fear and anxiety lead them to avoid particular situations, it may be appropriate to invite them to work towards facing
the situation they fear most by gradually facing increasingly threatening situations. This type of intervention is appropriate where the fear
is related to going out of the house or having arguments. For example, in couples where a member has agoraphobia and panic attacks, it may
be appropriate to invite the non-symptomatic partner to escort the person with agoraphobia on increasingly longer outings to learn how to
cope with such challenges in a supportive context. Where couples avoid conflict or avoid talking about couples issues and instead discuss the
children, they may be invited to schedule increasingly longer conversations about couples issues each day. For example, over a 3-week period
they may be invited to lengthen their scheduled conversations from 5 to 15 minutes.
Practising symptoms
With some problems, couples may be invited to practise the symptoms so as to gain control over them. For example, couples who argue
regularly may be invited to set aside a designated time each day (e.g. 9.00-9.15 each evening) and confine their arguments to this period
exclusively. They may be invited to do this so that they can learn to control the timing of the fights. If their arguments escalate rapidly,
they may be invited to take one long turn, each of about seven minutes, in which they fully express all that they wish to say or listen to
their partner doing so. This allows couples to gain control over the pacing of their fights. If they argue about a topic like jealousy, with one
partner feeling particularly jealous, they may be invited during scheduled arguments over jealousy to reverse roles so that they can learn to
understand each other's positions.


Self-regulation tasks
Within any relationship, partners have more control over their own behaviour than that of their spouse. Couples may be helped to use this
insight to alter the problematic behaviour patterns in which they have become embroiled with their partners (Halford, 1998). A number
of self-regulatory strategies may be used. First, they may learn to identify and state their needs more clearly as requests for specific
positive actions on the part of their partners. Second, they can plan to selectively attend to their partner's positive exchanges within the
relationship and use these as opportunities to respond to their partner in positive ways. Third, they can plan to avoid introducing negativity
into the relationship by avoiding complaining and expressing aggression or other negative emotions within the relationship. This may
involve identifying risky situations where such expressions are likely and avoiding or changing these. Fourth, they may plan to respond to
negativity from their partner in ways that minimise their negative impact. For example, they may say they are taking time out to avoid an
escalating battle. Fifth, they may arrange to have needs that are unmet within the relationship fulfilled in other relationships or situations.
For example, needs for companionship may be met by arranging activities with friends. Needs for self-esteem may be based on reflecting on
one's own behaviour and values rather than relying on one's partner's evaluations. Sixth, they may be invited to explore their expectations
of the relationship, and consider altering these so that they more closely fit with what their partner can provide. Finally, they may be invited
to keep the option of leaving the relationship open as a possible way of reducing relationship distress.
Interventions that focus on belief systems
The following interventions focus largely on transforming belief systems:
• Reframing problems
• Pinpointing strengths

• Relabelling
• Presenting multiple perspectives
• Externalising problems and building on exceptions.
It is usually unnecessary to give a rationale for using these types of interventions, since they are broadly speaking an expression of a
position that is fundamentally non-blaming, compassionate, optimistic and respectful of a couple's resourcefulness (Carr, 2012).
Reframing
With reframing, couples are offered a new framework within which to conceptualise a sequence of events, and this new way of
conceptualising the sequence of events makes it more likely that the problem will be resolved rather than maintained. The three-column
formulation model offers a template for major reframes such as that given in Figure 6.1, but minor reframes of specific events may be offered
throughout therapy. Reframe problems in non-blaming-interactional rather than blaming-individual terms, and in solvable rather than
uncontrollable or fixed terms. Reframe partners' reasons for engaging in problem-maintaining behaviour as arising from positive rather
than negative intentions.
Here are a couple of examples of minor reframes. Both partners in a distressed couple insisted that the main problem was that the other
person was to blame because the other partner was 'a vindictive, mean selfish bastard'. The following reframing was offered:
'When you disagree with each other strongly, you both end up blaming each other and calling each other names. From what you have each
said to me, the main reason you do this is because each of you feels disappointment and a deep sense of loss that your wish for your partner
to meet your needs has not been met. I wonder if you would be willing to explore ways that you might be able to meet each other's needs, so
as to reduce the constant disappointment that you both battle?'

In couple therapy, reframing is often required when one partner in a couple overtly or covertly invites the therapist to side with him or her
against the other partner. In conflictual couples, the request is usually for the therapist to act as judge and jury and agree that one partner is
right and the other wrong. Reframe statements about one partner being right and the other wrong in relational terms, such as:
'It seems that in this relationship you have developed equally valid yet distinct viewpoints. Discussions about which is the correct
viewpoint keep you connected in frequent passionate conversations. However, at some point you may wish to explore other ways of being
connected besides arguing about whose viewpoint is right and whose is wrong.'
In non-conflictual couples involved in complementary relationships, where one partner is defined as ill or weak and the other as
competent and strong, the request is usually for the therapist to take on the job of supporting the supposedly weaker partner and take this
burden off the supposedly stronger partner. Reframe statements about one partner being weak and the other strong in relational terms, such
as:
'It seems there is an acceptance that X is weaker than Y and so requires regular help and support from Y to keep going. It also seems that
there is an invitation for me to assist with supporting X. I find this invitation difficult to accept because, from my vantage point, I am struck
by the strength and competence that X shows in providing Y with the role of apparently being the strong and competent person in this
relationship. It may be useful to explore other ways this strength could be used.'
Pinpointing strengths
Most distressed couples have lost sight of their many strengths. Help couples rediscover these by drawing their attention to them
when things that the couple do in therapy provide evidence for their presence. Then attribute these strengths to the couple's defining
characteristics. Such strengths include loyalty; sticking together through thick and thin; tolerance for distress; commitment to the idea
that the relationship can improve; a shared history of a relationship that once worked well; thoughtfulness in trying to make sense of

the relationship difficulties; the capacity to listen carefully to each other's viewpoints despite distress; self-control in avoiding violence;
maturity in not involving the children in every couple's battle; and passion for rather than apathy about the relationship.
Relabelling
On a moment-to-moment basis during all stages of therapy, avail of opportunities to highlight partner's strengths. This reduces
demoralisation and helps couples develop beliefs about each other's positive attributes and their ability to solve their own problems. With
relabelling, offer positive or optimistic labels for ambiguous behaviour as a substitute for negative or pessimistic labels or attributions. For
example where a client says, 'He was standing there looking stupid, so I told him to get on with it,' this may be relabelled by saying 'When he
was thinking through what to do next, and you encouraged him to go ahead, what happened?' Where a client says 'She needs to be at home
when she is this ill,' the sentiment may be reframed as, 'While she is recovering, how do you believe she should spend her time?'
Presenting multiple perspectives
Where couples have become polarised, they may be offered a message containing multiple perspectives that articulates and empathises with
the validity of each position, while also opening up the possibility of an alternative systemic framing of their difficulties (Papp, 1982). For
example:
'I was struck by the way each of you have distinctive styles for managing situations and have discussed this with two colleagues since we
last met, to obtain their expert opinions on how best to proceed. One of my colleagues was taken by Mary's style. Mary, you have shown that
your own personal style is to talk straight and say what is on your mind. So if you want John to know that you think a job needs to be done
in the house, you tell him straight and don't beat around the bush. If he doesn't take notice, you tell him again. That is the 'straight-talking
approach'. My other colleague was impressed by your style, John. You take a 'thoughtful approach'. You think things over a great deal before
saying anything. This is a personal style and one that reflects your careful approach to this relationship. I suppose the question that is raised


for me is, how can the best of both styles be brought to bear on the difficulties and distress you are both experiencing? Perhaps you have
views on this you would like to air today?'
Externalising problems and building on exceptions
To develop a positive belief system or narrative about their relationship, invite couples to externalise their difficulties as separate from the
relationship. Then help them remember the exception formulation they constructed during assessment. Next ask them to recount in detail
multiple instances of exceptional non-problematic episodes. Then, help them to explore ways to recreate exceptions like these in the future.
As this positive narrative about their relationship evolves, invite them to speculate about what this way of defining themselves says about
them as a couple. Invite them to recreate exceptions as a homework assignment and to involve other people from their social network
in recognising their positive definition of themselves as a resourceful and connected couple (White, 1995, 2007, 2011). Here is a line of
questioning that may be used in this type of work:
• In our first meeting you told me that there were often exceptional times when the problem should have occurred but didn't. How have you
both arranged from time to time to prevent these bad relationship habits from infecting your relationship?
• If I were watching a video of these exceptional episodes, what details would I see that were different from those episodes where bad
relationship habits infect your relationship?
Can you tell me about three or four of these episodes right now?
• How could you use this information to arrange situations where your relationship is uninfected by these bad habits? ... Is that something
you would be willing to do?
• It seems that all of these positive and exceptional events are connected and reflect the degree to which you really care about each other.
How do you imagine this central part of your relationship will find expression in the future? What will it look like?
• What do all of these exceptional events from the past and the ones that will happen in the future say about you as a couple?

• Do they say you are a couple that is kind? ... committed? ... caring? ... passionate? etc....?
• Who from your family would you most like to witness this aspect of your relationship?
• How could you let them know that you are a kind, committed, caring, passionate couple? Is that something you would be willing to do?
Interventions that focus on broader constitutional factors
Interventions that aim to modify the impact of historical, contextual and constitutional predisposing factors or mobilise protective factors
within these areas include:
• Addressing constitutional factors
• Addressing contextual issues
• Addressing family-of-origin issues.
Addressing constitutional factors
Constitutional vulnerabilities may be genetic or they may involve debilitating somatic states, sequelae of early illness or injury, learning
difficulties or difficult temperament. Couples in which one partner has a constitutional vulnerability may require psychoeducation about
the condition or vulnerability; help with ensuring the vulnerable partner adheres to a medication regime where this is appropriate; referral
for medical consultation where appropriate; and support in securing an appropriate placement if necessary.
Psychoeducation
In psychoeducation, give both general information about the problem and a specific three-column formulation of the vulnerable family
member's unique difficulties (McFarlane, 2002). Simplicity and realistic optimism are central to good psychoeducation. It is important not to

overwhelm couples with information, so a good rule of thumb is to think about a case in complex terms but explain it to clients in as simple
terms as possible. Put succinctly: 'Think complex - Talk simple.' Good clinical practice involves matching the amount of information given
about the formulation and case management plan to the client's readiness to understand and accept it. A second important rule of thumb is
to engender a realistic level of hope in psychoeducation by focusing on strengths and protective factors, as well as aetiological factors later.
Put succinctly: 'Create hope - Name strengths.' Group psychoeducation offers a forum where couples can meet others in the same position,
and this has the benefit of providing additional support.
In psychoeducation, information on clinical features, predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors may be given
along with the probable impact of the problem in the short and long term on cognition, emotions, behaviour, family adjustment, school
adjustment and health. Details of the multimodal treatment programme should be given both orally and in written form, if appropriate, in
a way that is comprehensible to couples. It is important to highlight strengths that increase the probability that the vulnerable partner will
respond positively to treatment and that the other partner will learn an appropriate way to respond to the vulnerable partner's symptoms.
This should be balanced with a statement of the sacrifices that the couple will have to make to participate in the treatment programme.
Common sacrifices include attending a series of consultation sessions; discussing difficult issues openly; completing homework
assignments; being prepared for progress to be hampered by setbacks; learning to live with ongoing residual difficulties; accepting that
episodes of therapy are time-limited; and accepting that at best, the chances are only two out of three that therapy will be helpful.
Adherence to medical regimes
Initially, in cases where non-adherence is a problem, it is important that couples are involved in understanding the regime and that the non-
symptomatic partner is helped to support the vulnerable partner in complying with the regime. As adherence improves, more autonomous


management of adherence should be encouraged. Adherence to medical regimes is maximised if the following guidelines are followed (Ley,
1988):
• Give a rationale for the regime.
• Set out the medication and medical care regime in simple language, inviting clients to do specific things.
• Describe the medication regime and medical care tasks briefly and break complex tasks into parts.
• Check that the clients have understood the regime.
• Emphasise the importance of adherence to the regime and the positive and negative effects and side effects of both adherence and non-
adherence.
• Write down complex tasks.
• State that adherence will be reviewed in every session and convey an expectation of cooperation.
• Always review adherence and respond favourably to adherence.
Manage non-adherence in the way outlined for managing resistance described later.
• With adherent clients, encourage autonomous management of adherence.
Addressing contextual issues
Where factors in the wider social context hinder progress, the following interventions may be considered:
• Network meetings
• Changing roles
• Building support

• Mourning losses
• Exploring secrets.
Network meetings
Where couples have multiple problems and are involved with multiple agencies and professionals, convene network meetings, especially if
the problem solving within the network is poorly coordinated (Carr, 2012). Without good coordination, opportunities for using available
resources effectively and synergistically may be lost. Instead, members of the network may inadvertently drift into problem-maintaining
behaviour patterns.
Convene a network meeting to clarify or refine the three-column formulation and to agree on roles and responsibilities. Open review
meetings with introductions, set the agenda and state that each person will have an opportunity to make a contribution. Make sure that
everyone gets a fair hearing by helping the reticent to elaborate their positions and the talkative to condense their contributions. Summarise
periodically to help members maintain focus. Above all, maintain neutrality by siding with no one, and curiously enquire about each
person's position. Use time-out, if necessary, to integrate contributions, refine the formulation and elaborate options for action. Once the
meeting accepts the refined formulation, request a commitment to develop or refine the action plan. Then work towards that by examining
options and agreeing on which team members are responsible for particular parts of the programme. Minute all agreements and agree on
further review dates.
When contributing to a network meeting, prepare points on your involvement in the case, your hypotheses and plans. Use slack time at the
beginning of the meeting or during the tea break to build good working alliances with network members. Always introduce yourself before
making your first contribution, if you are new to the network. Outline your involvement first and hypotheses and plans later. Make your
points briefly and summarise your points at the end of each major contribution. When you disagree, focus on clarifying the issue, not on

attacking the person with whom you disagree. Keep notes on who attended the meeting, on the formulation and the plan agreed. If you have
unresolved ambivalent feelings after the meeting, discuss these in supervision.
Changing roles
Stresses associated with lifecycle transitions described in Chapter 1 or home-work role strain can underpin problem-maintaining beliefs and
behaviour patterns. Facilitating changes in partner's roles to address the way they jointly tackle these demands may be appropriate. Invite
couples to identify the new demands at home and work and help them negotiate an equitable division of labour that is compatible with their
strengths and cultural expectations.
Building support
Where lack of social support underpins problem-maintaining beliefs and behaviour patterns, this deficit can be addressed by providing
a therapeutic forum where couples may confide their views and feelings. For chronic problems, refer couples to self-help support groups
where they can meet with others who have similar problems to address long-term social support deficits. Where couples in nuclear families
have become disconnected from their extended families, suggest that couples invite members of their extended families to sessions to
develop supportive relationships with them.
Mourning losses
Where unresolved grief underpins problem-maintaining beliefs and behaviour patterns, couples may be helped to engage in rituals to
mourn their losses (Walsh & McGoldrick, 2004). Bereavement, separation, illness, injury, unemployment and moving house are common
loss experiences for couples. In Chapter 1 it was noted that adjustment to loss involves processes such as shock; denial; futile searching


for the lost person, attribute or situation; despair and sadness; anger at the lost person or those seen as responsible for the loss; anxiety
about other inevitable losses, including one's own death; and acceptance. These processes occur as couples change their belief systems to
accommodate the loss. Couples become stuck in the mourning process for various reasons. In some cases couples have tried to short-circuit
the grieving process and act as if they have grieved, but find that from time to time they become inexplicably and inappropriately angry
or sad. In other cases, the expression of sadness or anger persists over years and so compromises the couple's development. Prescribing
morning rituals where lost members, attributes or situations are remembered in detail and couples then bid them farewell may be liberating
for couples paralysed by unresolved grief.
Exploring secrets
Where the reason for the absence of therapeutic progress is obscure, it is worth considering that one or other partner is harbouring a family
secret or having a secret affair. In these instances, ask the couple to consider the possible implications of such a hypothetical secret. Here are
some useful questions to ask in such instances:
It seems to me that there may be some unknown factor contributing to your distress, otherwise you would be making more progress than has
occurred. I don't know what this unknown factor is. My guess is that if one of you knows what it is, you think that it would be least hurtful if
you kept it a secret. So please, hold on to your secret if you have one. For now, let us assume that something secret is happening. If that were
the case, how would each of you handle it. Is this something you are prepared to discuss?
• How would you react if you found out about this secret?
• If I were watching a video of the showdown when you found out about the secret, and say it was an affair, what would I see?
• What would it mean for your relationship if your partner was having an affair?

• If you found out your partner was having an affair and you decided to end this relationship, how would that pan out? What would each of
you do?
• How would you forgive your partner?
• How would you expect your partner to make up for his or her infidelity?
Information from this line of hypothetical questioning may throw light on the reasons for lack of therapeutic progress.
Addressing family-of-origin issues
Where there is the possibility that unresolved family-of-origin issues are compromising therapeutic progress, it is worth exploring
transgenerational patterns, scripts and myths to help couples understand how relationship habits from their family of origin are influencing
their current life situation. In some instances, it may be helpful to facilitate accessing, expressing and integrating emotions associated with
adverse family-of-origin experiences that underpin destructive relationship habits. In others, it may be valuable to coach clients to reconnect
with parents from whom they have become cut off, so they can become free of triangulation in their families of origin and so stop replicating
this in their families of procreation.
Exploring
Invite clients to explore transgenerational patterns, scripts and myths relevant to their difficulties in making therapeutic progress using
their genograms as the focus for the following lines of questioning (Boszormenyi-Nagy et al., 1991; Friedman, 1991):
I have noticed that no matter how hard you try to make sense of this problem and tackle it in a sensible way, you end up in difficulty. You have
a way that you would like your relationships to be but you just can't seem to get it to work like that. Something is blocking you. One possibility

is that you are carrying relationship habits from your family of origin in the back of your mind, and any time you are under stress you fall into
these old habits. Would you like to explore this possibility?
• Look at your genogram and think about what have been the most important relationships in your life.
• What relationship habits did you learn from these relationships?
• In these relationships, how did you learn to live with giving and receiving care and support?
• Tell me how your parents and siblings received and gave support to each other.
• In these relationships, what did you learn about the way people should communicate with each other in families? How should husbands
and wives or mothers and fathers talk to each other?
• Tell me how your parents and siblings talked to each other about important issues.
• In these relationships, how did you learn to deal with leading and following, the whole issue of managing power?
• Tell me about who was in charge in your family of origin and how others fitted in around this.
• In your family of origin, how did you learn to deal with conflict?
• What happened when your parents or siblings didn't agree about an important issue?
• What about triangles? Did people get stuck in triangles in your family of origin?
• Was anyone 'piggy-in-the-middle' between your parents or two other people?
• Are you still involved in a triangle in your family of origin?
• Whom have you stayed close to?
• Who have you cut off?
• Have you ever tried to reconnect with your cut-off parent?
• What are you avoiding by being cut off? What is the disaster you guess would happen if you spoke intimately with the person from whom
you are cut off?

• What does this exploration tell you about the possible relationship habits you have learned from your parents, siblings and other family
members?
• When you try to do the sensible thing in solving the problem you have with your partner that brought you into therapy, how do these
relationship habits interfere with this?
• Do you think that there are situations in which you can control the urge to follow through on these relationship habits you have received
from your parents, siblings and other family members?
• What is it about these situations that allows you to break these chains, these destructive relationship habits?
• Would you like to explore ways of weakening their influence on you?
Before making this decision, I am inviting you to look at the downside of changing your relationship habits. One big problem is this: if you
change the relationship habits you learned from your parents, you may feel like you are being disloyal to them. What are the consequences of
that for you and for your relationship with them?
Lines of questioning such as this conducted over a number of sessions may lead in some instances to a realisation that family-of-origin
issues are interfering with effective problem solving in clients' current relationship with their partners. They may also lead clients to want to
change these. Awareness of destructive relationship habits learned in the family of origin is rarely enough to liberate clients from slavishly
following these habits when under stress.
Re-experiencing
One way to help clients weaken these relationship habits is to create a context within which they can remember and re-experience the highly
emotional situations in which they learned them, and integrate these forgotten and destructive experiences into their conscious narrative
about themselves (Greenberg, 2002, 2011). Invite clients within therapy sessions to close their eyes and visualise their memories of specific

situations in which they learned specific relationship habits and tolerate experiencing the intense negative affect that accompanies such
visualisation experiences. Invite clients to verbalise the self-protective emotionally charged responses that they would have liked to have
made in these situations to their parents or caregivers, within therapy sessions. Such responses may be made to a visualised image of
their caregiver or to an empty chair, symbolising their caregiver or parent. In addition, invite clients to write (but not send) detailed letters
to their parents or caregivers expressing in graphic emotional terms how difficult they found their challenging early-life experiences in
which they learned their destructive relationship habits. These processes of re-experiencing and responding differently to early formative
experiences helps clients gain control over their destructive relationship habits. Also when partners witness each other exploring and then
re-experiencing stressful family-of-origin memories in this way, it helps them develop compassion for each other.
Reconnecting
A further technique that helps clients to break free from inadvertently slipping into destructive relationship habits is to coach them to
reconnect with parents from whom they have become cut off (Friedman, 1991). Invite clients to plan a series of visits with the parent from
whom they are cut off and talk with them in an adult-to-adult mode, and avoid slipping into their old relationship pattern of distancing and
cutting off from the parent. Initially in these visits conversation may focus on neutral topics. However, the greatest therapeutic gains tend
to be made where clients can tell the parent in an adult manner how the parent's behaviour hurt, saddened or angered the client as a child
and how this led to a long period of distancing and cut-off which the client would like to end and eventually replace with a less destructive
relationship. Sometimes, clients find making such statements easier if they write them out with coaching from their therapists and rehearse
them in therapy sessions prior to meeting with their parents.
Managing resistance
Resistance may take the form of clients not cooperating during therapy sessions, not completing tasks between sessions, not attending

sessions, or refusing to terminate the therapy process (Carr, 2012). Resistance is common and often occurs because clients are ambivalent
about the process of change. That is, they begin to doubt that the benefits of achieving therapeutic goals outweigh the costs of change,
because change inevitably involves personal costs. When this occurs, the central task is to suspend all attempts at empowering clients
to achieve their stated therapeutic goals and focus all therapeutic effort on addressing this ambivalence, no matter how long this takes.
Only when clients have addressed their personal dilemmas about the costs of maintaining the status quo and the costs of changing their
situation will they be in a position to return to the process of therapeutic problem solving. The main therapeutic task is to help the couple
clearly and explicitly articulate their beliefs about the costs of change and to empathise with this ambivalence. These beliefs may involve
feared catastrophes associated with change or a conviction about their powerlessness to change important aspects of their situation and
the inevitable disappointment that will arise from trying and failing again. It is vital to avoid any hint of criticism when enquiring about
ambivalence, since most clients when they experience ambivalence are already engaging in covert self-criticism. Here is the sort of question
that may be asked to help clients address ambivalence about change:
'I sense that you believe you are between a rock and a hard place today, that you believe the costs of following through on the plans you
have been making are too high. Let's take some time to talk about that today. What do you believe the downside will be for you in sorting this
problem out?'
Stage 4. Disengaging or recontracting
In the final stage of therapy, the main tasks are to fade out the frequency of sessions; help the couple understand the change process;
facilitate the development of relapse management plans; and frame the process of disengagement as the conclusion of an episode in an
ongoing relationship rather than the end of the relationship. In relapse management planning, help couples to forecast the types of stressful
situations in which relapses may occur, their probable negative reactions to relapses, and the ways in which they can use the lessons learned
in therapy to cope with these relapses in a productive way. Most relapses are associated with a build-up of stressful life events, and in some

instances these then interact with constitutional vulnerabilities. For example, individuals with seasonal affective disorder are particularly
prone to relapse in early winter, particularly if exposed to a high level of stress. Once couples have considered events that might precipitate
a relapse, explore the ways in which their problem-maintaining interaction patterns and belief systems will translate a slip into a full-
blown relapse. Enquire about their plans for handling this in light of the lessons learned in therapy. Disengagement is usefully constructed
as an episodic event rather than as the end of a relationship. This is particularly important when working with couples who have chronic
problems. Offer them a distant follow-up appointment or telephone backup to help manage relapses. In some instances, the end of one
therapeutic contract will lead immediately to the beginning of a further contract, for example where couples have addressed adult or
couple's problems and want to progress to a discussion of parent-child issues.
Summary
ISCT may be conceptualised as a developmental and recursive process involving the stages of planning, assessment, treatment, and
disengagement or recontracting. Specific tasks must be completed at each stage before progressing to the next. In ISCT, for any problem,
an initial hypothesis and later formulation may be constructed in which (1) the behaviour pattern that maintains the problem is specified;
(2) the constraining belief systems which underpin the partners' roles in this pattern are outlined; and (3) the broader contextual factors
that predispose couples to these belief systems and behaviour patterns are given. In addition, a similar three-column formulation may be
constructed to explain exceptional episodes in which problems were expected to occur but did not happen. These three-column formulation
models provide a template for guiding the assessment of the couple's problems and for planning therapy. Therapeutic interventions may be
classified in terms of the specific domains they target within three-column problem and exception formulations, with some interventions
targeting behaviour change, others targeting belief systems, and still others focusing on contextual predisposing factors.


Further reading for clients
Christensen, A., & Jacobson, N. (2014). Reconcilable Differences (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.
Gottman, J., & Silver, N. (1999). The Seven Principles for Making Marriage Work. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. This guide is based on
years of research by Gottman.
Johnson, S. (2008). Hold Me Tight. Seven Conversations for a Lifetime of Love. New York: Little Brown. This guide is based on emotionally
focused couple therapy.
Markman, H., Stanley, S., & Blumberg, S. L. (2010). Fighting for Your Marriage (Delux Revised Edition). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. This
guide is based on a scientifically evaluated premarital programme and includes a DVD.
Wile, D. (2008). After the Honeymoon. How Conflict Can Improve Your Relationship (Revised Edition). Oakland, CA. Collaborative Couple
Therapy Books.
Further reading
Carr, A. (2012). Family Therapy: Concepts Process and Practice (Third Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
Gurman, A. (2008). Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy (Fourth Edition). New York: Guilford.
Halford, W., & Markman, H. (1997). Clinical Handbook of Marriage and Couples Interventions. New York: Wiley.


Assessment instruments
Rust, L., Bennun, L., Crowe, M., & Golombok, S. (1988). GRIMS. The Golombok Rust Inventory of Marital State. Cambridge: The
Psychometrics Centre. Available at http://www.psychometrics.cam.ac.uk/services/psychometric-tests/GRIMS
Snyder, D. (1997). Marital Satisfaction Inventory-Revised. Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services.
References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition-Text Revision, DSM-IV-
TR). Arlington, VA: Author.
Boszormenyi-Nagy, I., Grunebaum, J., & Ulrish, D. (1991). Contextual therapy. In A. Gurman & D. Kniskern (Eds.), Handbook of Family
Therapy (Volume 11, pp. 200-238). New York: Brunner Mazel.
Carr, A. (2000). Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice. Chichester: Wiley.
Carr, A. (2009). What Works with Children, Adolescents and Adults? A Review of Research on the Effectiveness of Psychotherapy. London:
Routledge.
Carr, A. (2011). Positive Psychology (Second Edition). London: Brunner Routledge.
Carr, A. (2012). Family Therapy: Concepts Process and Practice (Third Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
Carr, A. (2014). The evidence-base for couple therapy, family therapy and systemic interventions for adult-focused problems. Journal of
Family Therapy, 36(2), 158-194.
deShazer, S. (1988). Clues: Investigating Solutions in Brief Therapy. New York: Norton.


deShazer, S., & Dolan, Y. (2007). More Than Miracles: The State of the Art of Solution-Focused Brief Therapy. Binghamton, NY: Haworth.
Finchman, F., & Bradbury, T. (1992). Assessing attributions in marriage: The Relationship Attribution Measure. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62, 457-468.
Friedman, E. (1991). Bowen theory and therapy. In A. Gurman & D. Kniskern (Eds.), Handbook of Family Therapy (Volume 11, pp. 134-
170). New York: Brunner Mazel.
Gottman, J. (1993). The roles of conflict engagement, escalation and avoidance in marital Interaction: A longitudinal view of five types
of couples. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 6–15.
Greenberg. L.S. (2002). Emotion Focused Therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Greenberg, L. S. (2011). Emotion-Focused Therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
Gurman, A. (2008). Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy (Fourth Edition). New York: Guilford.
Haley, J. (1963). Strategies of Psychotherapy. New York: Grune & Stratton.
Halford, W. (1998). The ongoing evolution of behavioural couples therapy: Retrospect and prospect. Clinical Psychology Review, 18, 613-
634.
Halford, W., & Markman, H. (1997). Clinical Handbook of Marriage and Couples Interventions. New York: Wiley.
Jacobson, N., & Christensen, A. (1996). Integrative Couple Therapy: Promoting Acceptance and Change. New York: Norton.
Johnson, S. (2004). The Practice of Emotionally Focused Couple Therapy: Creating Connection (Second Edition). New York: Routledge.
Ley, P. (1988). Communicating with Patients: Improving Communication Satisfaction and Compliance. London: Croom Helm.
Masten, A. (2013). Risk and resilience in development. In P. Zelazo (Ed.), Oxford Handbook of Developmental Psychology. Volume 2. Self and
Other (pp. 579-607). New York: Oxford University Press.
McFarlane, W. (2002). Multifamily Groups in the Treatment of Severe Psychiatric Disorders. New York: Guilford Press.
McGoldrick, M., Gerson, R., & Petry, S. (2008). Genograms: Assessment and Intervention (Third Edition). New York: Norton.


Minuchin, S. (1974). Families and Family Therapy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Newman, B., & Newman, P. (2015). Development Through Life: A Psychosocial Approach (Twelfth edition). Stamford, CT: Cengage.
Papp, P. (1982). The Greek Chorus and Other Techniques of Paradoxical Therapy. Family Process, 19, 45-57.
Patterson, G. (1982). Coercive Family Process. Eugene, OR: Castalia.
Rust, L., Bennun, L., Crowe, M., & Golombok, S. (1988). GRIMS. The Golombok Rust Inventory of Marital State. Cambridge: The
Psychometrics Centre.
Schmaling, K., & Scher, T. (2000). The Psychology of Couples and Illness: Theory, Research and Practice. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Shoham, V., Rohbaugh, M., & Cleary, A. (2008). Brief strategic couple therapy. In A. Gurman (Ed.), Clinical Handbook of Couples Therapy
(Fourth Edition, pp. 299-322). New York: Guilford.
Snyder, D. (1997). Marital Satisfaction Inventory-Revised. Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services.
Snyder, D. K., & Whisman, M. A. (Eds.). (2003). Treating Difficult Couples: Helping Clients with Coexisting Mental and Relationship Disorders.
New York: Guilford Press.
Walsh, F. (2012). Normal Family Processes (Fourth Edition). New York: Guilford.
Walsh, F., & McGoldrick, M. (2004). Living Beyond Loss: Death in the Family (Second Edition). New York: Norton.
White, M. (1995). Re-authoring Lives. Adelaide: Dulwich Centre Publications.
White, M. (2007). Maps of Narrative Practice. New York, Norton.
White, M. (2011). Narrative Practice. Continuing the Conversations. New York: Norton.
Wills, T., Weiss, R., & Patterson, G. (1974). A behavioural analysis of the determinants of marital satisfaction. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 42, 802-811.


Chapter 7 Biomedical approaches and use of drugs to treat adult mental health problems
Stephen McWilliams, Dolores Keating and Eadbhard O'Callaghan
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-7
Men will always be mad and those who think they can cure them are the maddest of all.
-Voltaire
Introduction
For millennia, choosing the most appropriate treatment for major psychological morbidity has been a controversial issue. Indeed, although
Voltaire's assertion may seem a little pessimistic given our current level of knowledge, we are still engaged in a steep learning curve driven
largely by our hitherto lack of success. Even since the days of the 18th-century French philosopher's remark, different eras have brought
about various 'revolutionary' models of treatment, often complemented by the vehement vituperation of the remainder. So, why have
prognoses only recently begun to improve?
One reason may be that, until recently, an either/or distinction was commonly applied to the treatment of major psychological morbidity
in that, depending on the variety of therapist involved, a patient was typically treated with either a 'biological' approach involving
pharmacotherapy or a 'psychological' approach utilising psychotherapy. Recently, however, advances have demonstrated that psychological
interventions can be highly effective in those disorders traditionally labelled as 'biologically based', while the converse may also be true.
Indeed, appropriate treatment is usually a question of emphasis within a comprehensive treatment regime.

For example, in psychotic illnesses and bipolar affective disorder, it is usually appropriate to place an emphasis upon pharmacotherapy
in the initial acute episode. Not only does this facilitate stabilisation of the individual's mental state, but it also enables them to benefit
more from the psychological and social therapies that follow with recovery in mind. Conversely, in the vast majority of anxiety-related
illness, the emphasis is better placed upon psychotherapy, with pharmacotherapy used as either a temporary adjunct or for situations where
psychological therapies have failed. Many other conditions lie on a spectrum between these two extremes.
As other chapters in this book deal with the psychological approaches used in treatment, we have taken the opportunity to summarise
some of the commonly used pharmacological therapies with a general reference to the World Health Organization's (1992) International
Classification of Diseases, Tenth Edition (ICD-10) and the American Psychiatric Association's (2013) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5).
Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
Absorption and Metabolism of Drugs
Drugs can be taken orally, sublingually, rectally, intravenously, intramuscularly, topically, by inhalation or by long-acting intramuscular
injection or depot. Once inside the body, drugs must undergo the sequential processes of absorption, metabolism, distribution and elimination
in order to work optimally on the synaptic receptors of nerves.
Absorption of oral and rectal drugs occurs across the epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract. Such drugs are more likely to be absorbed
quickly if they are highly lipid-soluble, minimally alkaline or acidic, and small in terms of particle size, while their absorption is also aided
by moderate gastrointestinal motility and a good splanchnic flow of blood to the gut. Orally and rectally absorbed drugs undergo first-pass
metabolism in the wall of the gastrointestinal tract and in the liver by way of enzymes such as cytochrome P450. Some psychotropic drugs
such as chlorpromazine and morphine undergo substantial first-pass metabolism, which means the oral dose needs to be much higher in


comparison to the intramuscular or intravenous dose. Moreover, there are considerable variations between the doses needed by different
individuals due to varying first-pass metabolism. There are two phases of metabolism in the liver: phase one involving oxidation, reduction
or hydrolysis of drugs; and phase two involving conjugation and inactivation.
After metabolism, drugs are then distributed through the body's various compartments, which include the intracellular fluid
(approximately 40% of body weight), fat (20%) and extracellular fluid - comprised of plasma (5%) and interstitial water (18%). Several
factors determine where a drug will be distributed to; for example drugs with a larger molecular size and drugs that bind strongly to plasma
protein both tend to be confined to plasma. Highly lipid-soluble drugs tend to distribute themselves through the total body water, while lipid-
insoluble drugs find themselves unable to pass though cell membranes and are therefore confined to the extracellular compartment. Of note,
highly lipid-soluble drugs that bind strongly to body fat tend to be difficult to remove by haemodialysis in cases of overdose.
The blood-brain barrier, consisting of a continuous layer of tightly joined epithelial cells, is particularly important in drug distribution, as
psychotropic drugs must cross this barrier if they are to have any effect on the brain. The blood-brain barrier is more permeable to lipid-
soluble drugs during extreme stress and when inflammation occurs, such as in meningitis.
Finally, elimination of drugs takes place in the kidneys through three processes. Glomerular filtration occurs to most drugs except those
tightly bound to plasma proteins, while drugs such as morphine and pethidine undergo active excretion and reabsorption in the renal tubules.
Thirdly, passive diffusion across the renal tubules may occur in the case of some drugs, for example those with high lipid solubility.
Receptor Activation
Central to understanding how a drug works in the body is the concept of the synapse and the fact that the nervous system is not purely
electrical, but also chemical. Synapses are essentially 'gaps' between the nerves that travel both within the brain and from the brain to
various parts of the body. These synapses contain chemical neurotransmitters that bind to receptors on cell membranes and cause receptor
activation, resulting in cell function. Examples of neurotransmitters include dopamine, acetylcholine, noradrenaline, serotonin and histamine.

There are two important ways in which activation of receptors leads to cell function. First, activation may result in the opening and closing
of ion channels. Examples include nicotinic acetylcholine (nACh) receptors, which are linked to a sodium channel; gamma amino butyric acid
(GABA) receptors, which are linked to a chloride channel; and others such as serotonin (5-HT3) and glutamate receptors. In the case of the
nACh receptors, for example, five subunits (two alphas, a beta, a gamma and a delta) are clustered around a central transmembrane pore.
When acetylcholine binds to the extracellular parts of the two alpha subunits, changes occur in the shape of their alpha-helices, resulting in
opening of the pore which thus allows sodium ions to pass through and leads ultimately to an electrical impulse in the nerve.
The second method involves mobilisation of G-protein, a chemical messenger that activates ion channels or other chemicals such as cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and inositol phosphate. Receptors involved in this mechanism include muscarinic acetylcholine (mACh),
adrenoceptors, neuropeptide and most serotonin receptors. Of note, G-protein consists of two subunits, the alpha subunit binding to the
receptor and the beta subunit binding to the target.
These two mechanisms of receptor activation are important in understanding the current hypotheses linking neurotransmitter
dysregulation, psychological morbidity and pharmacotherapy.
Psychological Problems and Psychopharmacological Treatments
Dementia (ICD-10: F00-03. DSM-5: 331/290/294)
Dementia is a chronic, progressive and global decline in functioning which affects primarily memory, intellect and personality. Almost
always irreversible, its prevalence increases with age, from 5% of over-65s to 20% of over-80s. Aetiology includes degenerative causes such
as Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementia; vascular causes such as multi-infarct dementia, and other causes such as tumours and AIDS.
With all types of dementia, the treatment emphasis is placed on social support, general care and good carer education, with
pharmacotherapy often confined to Alzheimer's disease in patients with a Mini-Mental State score of more than 12. Medications are

comprised mainly of inhibitors of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase and include donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine. An alternative option
is memantine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist (see glossary at the end of this chapter).
Alcohol and substance abuse (ICD-10: F10–19. DSM-5: 291/292/303-5)
This category in the ICD-10 refers to not just alcohol, but also opioids, cannabinoids, sedatives, cocaine, other stimulants (such
as caffeine), hallucinogens, tobacco, volatile solvents and other psychoactive substances. Moreover, the classification includes criteria
for acute intoxication, harmful use, dependence, withdrawal and psychosis, with common adverse effects including disinhibition,
argumentativeness, aggression, labile mood, poor attention, impaired judgement and various physical complaints.
Alcohol abuse
Up to 30% of men and 10% of women consume alcohol in excess of the recommended maximum weekly amounts (21 units for men and 14
units for women). Meanwhile, up to 25% of men will be problem drinkers at some stage during their lives, while the heaviest drinking occurs
in the teens and early twenties, a time at which the 'binge drinking' phenomenon is most prevalent.
Detoxification from Alcohol
In an abusive situation, the brain becomes accustomed to a certain level of alcohol within the body. In such cases, a sudden discontinuation
of alcohol, leading to a drop in blood-alcohol levels, places the individual at risk of withdrawal symptoms which may occur within hours
of the last drink and tend to peak at between 24 and 48 hours. Early withdrawal symptoms include tremor, restlessness, anxiety, sweating,
insomnia, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, raised blood pressure, racing pulse and rarely seizures. Later symptoms may also include
agitation, confusion, disorientation, fever, paranoia and visual or auditory hallucinations. Symptoms are nevertheless usually mild to
moderate and typically abate within 5-7 days of the individual's last drink. In approximately 5% of cases, severe withdrawal in the form of
delirium tremens may occur.


Inappropriately managed alcohol withdrawal is associated with significant morbidity and mortality, and thus it is important to adopt
the correct supportive and pharmacological measures. Benzodiazepines (e.g. chlordiazepoxide) represent the current treatment of choice for
acute withdrawal. Intramuscular or intravenous vitamin replacement is often advisable as chronic alcohol abuse can lead to significant
vitamin deficiencies which may, in turn, lead to neurological conditions such as Wernicke's encephalopathy and Korsakoff's syndrome.
Detoxification in the community is a safe option for most patients, although hospital admission is often necessary where there is a history
of delirium tremens, withdrawal seizures, poor adherence to agreed treatment, cognitive impairment, inadequate social support or previous
failed community detoxification. Mild dependence can sometimes be treated supportively without medication, while moderate dependence
requires a regime typically consisting of 10-20 mg of chlordiazepoxide four times daily, reduced gradually over 5 days.
Severe dependence requires larger doses of benzodiazepines in an inpatient setting, with close monitoring of blood pressure, pulse and
symptoms of withdrawal using a recognised scale such as the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol-Revised Version (CIWA-
Ar; Sullivan et al., 1989). Benzodiazepines are best avoided until the patient is fully sober, at which point the drugs are ideally given flexibly
for 24-48 hours, followed by a regime of gradually reduced dosage over 5-10 days.
Alcoholic hallucinosis characteristically involves third-person auditory hallucinations in clear consciousness. Voices are often derogatory
or commanding in nature, while conversations and music may also be experienced. The onset of alcoholic hallucinosis, while often
associated with withdrawal, is nevertheless a distinct entity from delirium tremens. Naturally the condition is very distressing for the
patient and may require treatment with antipsychotic medication in addition to the withdrawal regime outlined earlier.
Maintaining Abstinence and Harm Reduction
Drugs used to help maintain abstinence from alcohol include disulfiram (Antabuse), acamprosate, naltrexone and (for harm reduction)
nalmefene. Disulfiram works by blocking the liver enzyme acetaldehyde dehydrogenase which metabolises alcohol. Patients who consume
alcohol while taking disulfiram, therefore, risk an unpleasant reaction involving nausea, headache and other symptoms due to an

accumulation of partially metabolised alcohol (acetaldehyde). Disulfiram can therefore be useful as part of a behavioural approach to
abstinence. Of note, significant liver disease is a contraindication to disulfiram.
Acamprosate enhances the functioning of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). In conjunction with important
psychological measures, acamprosate has been shown to reduce craving and enhance abstinence. As with disulfiram, it must be used with
caution in patients with liver disease. Naltrexone is an opioid receptor antagonist shown to reduce craving in patients abstinent from alcohol.
Once again, liver function should be adequate before commencement. Finally nalmefene is an opioid receptor antagonist that can be used for
harm reduction.
Cocaine Abuse
Cocaine is a stimulant that acts by inhibiting the reuptake of dopamine. It has a half-life of 50 minutes and is most commonly taken
intranasally - either alone or with heroin – but can also be smoked. Although unpleasant and characterised by mood, sleep and appetite
changes, withdrawal is rarely life-threatening and may be treated with short-term benzodiazepines. Some reports suggest that there may be
a role for antidepressants in preventing relapse.
Heroin Abuse
It is hard to judge the prevalence of heroin abuse in view of its illicit nature. However estimates suggest that it affects less than 1% of the
population with most new addicts being males in their twenties. Self-reporting of opioid dependence can be confirmed by testing urine and
observing for signs of withdrawal. Pharmacotherapy for withdrawal can then be considered alongside measures to address lifestyle, help
with psychosocial issues, stabilise drug intake and reduce drug-related harm.
Pharmacotherapy primarily involves using a long-acting opioid agonist (see glossary) such as methadone, or partial agonist such as a
buprenorphine, for detoxification and substitution therapy. These are controlled drugs with a low lethal dose and a high potential for

dependency and, as such, the indications and arrangements for their use are closely monitored. They are used only in patients who are
dependent on opioid drugs, and their consumption is heavily supervised, especially in the initial few months.
Choice of methadone or buprenorphine is ideally based in the patient's preference, although methadone is often the first-line choice
in practice. Its starting dose depends on the patient's tolerance level and drug-taking history, taking into account the long half-life of
methadone. As inappropriate dosing can be fatal, doctors are often cautious at first and commence treatment with dosages as low as 10–
30 mg. This is increased gradually, usually by no more than 10 mg per week, although heavily dependent users may require larger dosage
increases. As regular medical assessments are essential, patients usually attend daily for the first few days, allowing regular reviews and
dosage titrations to take place and thus helping to reduce withdrawal symptoms. Outpatient stabilisation can take six weeks or more,
although inpatient treatment and dose-reduction can occur more rapidly, with a linear reduction regime over as little as 10 days. It is usually
prescribed in oral liquid formulation.
Acute opioid intoxication is a contraindication to methadone treatment, the risk of fatal overdose being greater, while extreme caution is
also practised in patients with severe hepatic or renal failure. If methadone overdose occurs, it is treated with naloxone. Once a patient is
stable on methadone for a period of time, a contract may be negotiated to gradually and flexibly reduce the dosage by 5–10 mg weekly or
fortnightly.
Other drugs used in the management of opioid withdrawal include lofexidine. This is a non-opioid drug which is less likely to be misused
and is therefore useful in patients with less severe or lengthy drug histories. Side effects include sedation and rarely hypotension (low blood
pressure). Alternative opioid-based drugs include LAAM (levo-alpha-acetyl-methadyl), a mu receptor agonist with a long half-life. Finally,
naltrexone may have a role in relapse prevention.
Schizophrenia, Schizoaffective and Delusional Disorders (ICD-10: F20–29. DSM-5: 295–298)
The term schizophrenia was first coined by the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler in 1911. Since then, the concept has become more refined

and is regarded by the ICD-10 as a severe psychotic illness that is not attributable to alcohol or substances, or to organic brain disease.
Symptoms must be present on most days for a least a month, and may include persistent delusions, auditory hallucinations and thought
disorder. So-called first-rank psychotic symptoms include passivity delusions (in which the individual believes their actions, impulses or
feelings are controlled by an outside force), and thought insertion, withdrawal or broadcast. Schizophrenia often involves negative symptoms
such as apathy, paucity of speech, blunted affect and social withdrawal. More rarely, individuals may display catatonic behaviour in which
they, for example, unconsciously engage in physical posturing or become mute.
In ICD-10 schizophrenia is classified into the paranoid type, with mainly hallucinations and delusions; the hebephrenic type, with
preponderantly thought disorder and affective symptoms; the catatonic type, comprised of bizarre psychomotor eccentricities; and finally
the undifferentiated type. The onset of schizophrenia is usually between the ages of 15 and 40, and may lead to significant cognitive and
functional decline thereafter. Indeed, only one patient in four manages to avoid having more than one episode and no residual impairment
of functioning, while the remainder experience recurrent episodes, with up to a third enduring significant and progressive impairment.
Neurotransmitter Hypothesis of Schizophrenia
Before we examine the pharmacotherapy used to treat schizophrenia, it is important to note the neurotransmitter hypothesis upon which
such drugs are based. For example, it is known that certain drugs, such as amphetamines, cause dopamine release and also appear to cause
clinical signs and symptoms such as those in schizophrenia. Similarly, dopamine antagonists have been successfully used to treat psychotic
signs and symptoms, their efficacy appearing to correlate specifically with their affinity for dopamine D2 receptors, while further studies
have shown an increased number of dopamine receptors in the limbic system of individuals with schizophrenia.
The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia is not flawless – we have not yet explained where other neurotransmitters such as serotonin,
histamine, noradrenaline and glutamate come into the picture – but it provides us with a solid theoretical model upon which many effective
therapies are based.


Antipsychotic medication could be broadly divided into two categories: first-generation (formerly termed classical) and second-generation
(formerly termed atypical). First- generation antipsychotics such as chlorpromazine and haloperidol first became available in the 1950s
and, until relatively recently, represented the first-line option in the treatment of schizophrenia. They are mostly effective against positive
symptoms.
The quest for a side effect-free antipsychotic, effective against both positive and negative symptoms, led to the development of second-
generation antipsychotics. The first of these to appear was clozapine, which became available in the 1970s. Despite its association with fatal
agranulocytosis in 0.3% of patients, a vigilant monitoring service has facilitated its continued use in treatment-resistant schizophrenia.
Moreover, its role has expanded recently with studies suggesting some efficacy against suicide.
The past two decades have witnessed the emergence of newer second-generation antipsychotics such as risperidone, olanzapine,
amisulpride, quetiapine, ziprasidone, paliperidone, aripiprazole and lurasidone, all of which are purported to ameliorate both positive and
negative symptoms (to varying degrees).
As evidence suggests that a longer duration of untreated psychosis is linked to a more turbulent recovery and an increased likelihood
of relapse, it is important to initiate treatment as soon as the psychosis is suspected. Treatment often begins with a second-generation
antipsychotic at its lowest effective dosage, preferably in a single-dose regime, with three to six weeks allowed for a given dosage to work
before adjusting upwards. If symptoms persist or if the drug is not tolerated, a first- or second-generation antipsychotic represents the next-
line treatment, followed by clozapine as the third line.
Where it is necessary to exceed the pharmacologically recommended dosage (see Table 7.1), the reason should be discussed with the
patient and carefully documented in their notes, while patients should be monitored closely as recommended by the Royal College of
Psychiatrists and the guidelines of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE, 2009). Overall, approximately 60% of
positive symptoms respond to antipsychotics, with persistent non-response sometimes explained by inadequate dosage, misdiagnosis,

comorbidity or non-adherence. Long-acting injections may ameliorate the last of these, while useful adjuncts to treatment include
benzodiazepines, lithium and electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).
The importance of good maintenance and adherence cannot be overemphasised as the risk of relapse never really disappears.
Psychological interventions such as cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) have been shown to improve symptomatology, adherence and social
functioning, while psychosocial measures remain a vital component of any comprehensive recovery strategy. Information for patients and
carers, the involvement of voluntary organisations and supportive family psychotherapeutic measures are all extremely useful, especially in
the context of an increased likelihood of relapse in home environments with high levels of expressed emotion.
The first step in management, however, is the trial of a suitable antipsychotic medication. Maximum dosages of the commonly used
antipsychotic medications are given in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1 Maximum doses for common antipsychotic medications
Drug
Maximum dose
Chlorpromazine
Haloperidol
Zuclopenthixol
Clozapine
Sulpiride
Amisulpride
1,000 mg
20 mg
150 mg
900 mg
2,400 mg
1,200 mg

Olanzapine 20 mg
Risperidone 16 mg
Quetiapine 800 mg
Aripiprazole 30 mg
Ziprasidone 160 mg
Haloperidol depot 300 mg every 4 weeks
Flupenthixol depot 400 mg per week
Zuclopenthixol depot 600 mg per week

First-generation antipsychotics (daily dosage ranges in brackets)
Phenothiazines
Group I phenothiazines have side-chains containing aliphatic-rings and include chlorpromazine (25-1,000 mg) and promazine (400-800 mg).
Group II phenothiazines are comprised of the piperazines, which include trifluoperazine (10-50 mg) and fluphenazine (1-20 mg), while Group
III phenothiazines are comprised of the piperidines, which include thioridazine (150-800 mg). Although the latter is rarely used nowadays
because of its adverse effects on the heart, the other phenothiazines are still in use.
The adverse effects of phenothiazines are common to many of the first-generation antipsychotics. The extrapyramidal symptoms, which
include tardive dyskinesia, dystonia, Parkinsonism and akathisia, are all described later, while other important adverse effects include
sedation, hypotension, hypothermia (low body temperature), raised prolactin, convulsions, jaundice, abnormalities of heart rhythm and
anticholinergic symptoms such as dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention and constipation. Moreover, phenothiazines interact with


other medications such as lithium, anticholinergics, anticonvulsants, antidepressants and dopamine agonists. Blood monitoring is not
required.
Thioxanthenes
Flupenthixol (6-18 mg) and zuclopenthixol decanoate (20-150 mg) are available in an oral format and a depot injection, while zuclopenthixol
acetate is an injection used in acute psychosis and manic states. Side effects are similar to those of phenothiazines, while contraindications
include comatose states, pregnancy and lactation. Blood monitoring is not required.
Butyrophenones
Haloperidol (1-20 mg) and droperidol are available in oral and intramuscular preparations and are used to treat psychosis, agitation, mania,
extreme anxiety and Gilles de la Tourette's syndrome. Their adverse effects are similar to those of phenothiazines, but cardiac effects such as
prolonged QTc on the electrocardiogram (ECG) can be a particular issue that requires monitoring. Haloperidol interacts with chlorpromazine,
fluoxetine, carbamazepine and terfenadine and is not normally used in lactating mothers. Blood monitoring is not required.
Diphenylbutylpiperidines
Pimozide (2-20 mg) is used in both mania and psychosis and has adverse effects similar to those of phenothiazines. Serious cardiac
arrhythmias may also occur, however, making it necessary to monitor the ECG regularly. Pimozide may interact with diuretics and cardio-
active drugs such as tricyclic antidepressants, while it is generally avoided in patients who have pre-existing heart conditions and in women
who are pregnant or lactating.
Second-generation antipsychotics
Dibenzodiazepines
Arguably the biggest breakthrough in efficacious pharmacotherapy for schizophrenia has been clozapine, a most useful drug which

frequently succeeds where others have failed. Like many 'wonder drugs', however, clozapine is not without its problems. Potential adverse
effects include sedation, hypersalivation, weight gain, hypothermia, hypotension, cardiomyopathy, convulsions, delirium, jaundice and
blood disorders such as neutropenia and potentially fatal agranulocytosis.
Despite this rather daunting list of adverse effects, a specialised Clozapine Patient Monitoring Service helps to ensure the safety of the
medication, facilitating blood tests and providing useful advice for doctors, pharmacists and patients. A strict and gradual dosing regime
is recommended, particularly in the early phases of treatment as many of the adverse effects are dose-dependent; 12.5 mg once daily is the
usual starting dose, with increases of 12.5–25 mg per day up to a therapeutic daily divided dosage of approximately 450 mg, or a plasma level
of around 350 mcg/l. This can usually be achieved in 3–4 weeks but may take longer where side effects prove problematic. With clozapine,
adherence is particularly important because patients who miss more than 2 days of tablets require their dosages to be titrated upwards, once
again, from the beginning.
Clozapine may interact with any drug that depresses the manufacture of white blood cells in the bone marrow, for example carbamazepine.
Antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin can increase clozapine levels, while smoking and phenytoin can reduce clozapine levels.
Substituted benzamides
Sulpiride (400–2400 mg) and amisulpride (50–1,200 mg) act primarily on dopamine D2 and D3 receptors and thus appear to cause less
sedation and hypotension than many other antipsychotics. The side effects and interactions of sulpiride are otherwise similar to those of
phenothiazines, while high levels of the hormone prolactin may be a particular problem with amisulpride. The latter, as you might expect, is
contraindicated in lactating mothers and patients with prolactin-dependent tumours, while both drugs are contraindicated in patients with
phaeochromocytoma. Blood monitoring is not required.
Thienobenzodiazepines
Olanzapine (5–20 mg) is generally well tolerated, although its adverse effects include sedation, hypotension, anticholinergic symptoms and

transiently raised liver function tests. Weight gain is a particular problem. Smoking and carbamazepine can reduce olanzapine levels to a
small extent, while olanzapine is contraindicated in patients with narrow angle glaucoma and in lactating mothers. As with any sedating
medications, patients taking olanzapine should be especially careful driving or operating machinery.
Benzoxasoles
Risperidone (2-16 mg) is also used as a first-line treatment, its side effects including agitation, hypotension, abdominal pain, anxiety and
raised prolactin levels. Extrapyramidal symptoms are uncommon with risperidone at daily dosages of less than 6 mg, while interactions
are similar to those of phenothiazines. Risperidone consta - a slow-release preparation - is a thrice-weekly injection with the adherence
advantages associated with a depot. More recently, paliperidone (3-12 mg) has become available. Paliperidone is the active metabolite of
risperidone (9-hydroxyrisperidone), allowing for fewer side effects. It is available orally and as a long-acting injection.
Dibenzothiazepines
Quetiapine (300-800 mg) may be used as a first-line treatment for psychosis. More recently, quetiapine has also been found to be an effective
antidepressant in bipolar depression. Its adverse effects include hypotension, sedation, dry mouth, constipation, weight gain, dizziness and
changes in liver and thyroid function. Quetiapine is used cautiously with any drug that inhibits the liver enzyme cytochrome P450 and is best
avoided in pregnant or lactating women.
Benzisothiasoles
Ziprasidone (40-160 mg) is available orally. Its adverse reactions include somnolence, nausea, postural hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias
(prolonged QTc interval on ECG) and rarely dystonias (see later). It interacts with carbamazepine and some antiarrhythmics.
Newer second-generation antipsychotics
Aripiprazole (10-30 mg) is a partial dopamine agonist. Although relatively less likely than other second-generation antipsychotics to cause

weight gain, sedation or raised prolactin, it has been noted to cause akathisia in some patients, particularly if titrated too quickly. Lurasidone
is a new second-generation antipsychotic, not yet licensed at the time of writing.
Extrapyramidal side effects and their management
Acute dystonia
Acute dystonia occurs in 2-10% of patients on first-generation antipsychotics between hours and days of commencing therapy, and is
commonest in young males. Spasm occurs to groups of muscles, leading to fixed postures such as involuntary protrusion of the tongue,
clenched jaw muscles, torticollis (in which a group of neck muscles becomes rigid), or oculogyric crisis (in which the head points involuntarily
upwards with the mouth open wide and the eyes staring). Naturally, acute dystonia is extremely distressing and can result in poor adherence
to therapy.
Treatment involves the immediate administration of intramuscular or intravenous anticholinergic medication such as procyclidine,
followed by oral procyclidine or biperiden. The first-generation antipsychotic should be reduced in dosage or preferably changed to a second-
generation antipsychotic, which is less likely to cause dystonia at therapeutic doses.
Akathisia
Akathisia occurs in 20-25% of patients on first-generation antipsychotics and involves a distressing subjective feeling of motor restlessness,
usually involving the lower limbs. As it can lead to increased psychiatric disturbance, poor adherence and even suicide, medication
dosage should be reduced where possible and supplemented with a beta blocker (such as propranolol) or a benzodiazepine. Anticholinergic
medication may also be useful in the management of akathisia.
Parkinsonism
Parkinsonism occurs weeks to months after commencing treatment and is due primarily to a blockade of dopamine D2 receptors in the basal

ganglia. Symptoms include a mask-like facial expression, 'pill rolling' tremor, 'cogwheel' rigidity in the muscles, and a shuffling or festinant
gait. The first-generation antipsychotic should ideally be reduced in dosage or switched to a second-generation variety, while anticholinergic
medication, such as procyclidine or biperiden, may also be useful.
Tardive dyskinesia
Tardive dyskinesia occurs months to years after commencing first-generation antipsychotics in up to 60% of patients, with the risk
increasing further by 5% per year. It involves abnormal head and neck movements, progressing from tongue-rotating, lip-smacking and
orofacial dyskinesia to choreoathetoid movements of the head, neck and trunk. Elderly patients, females and patients with organic brain
damage or affective disorders are most at risk. There is little effective treatment and, indeed, reducing the antipsychotic dosage or adding
an anticholinergic may actually aggravate symptoms, albeit temporarily. Switching to clozapine may lead to some improvement in up to
70% but overall the best measure is prevention by favouring second-generation antipsychotics and discontinuing any medication that may
exacerbate movement disorders.
It is worth noting that tardive dyskinesia can occur in patients with schizophrenia who have never taken medication. This naturally leads
to some confusion regarding its aetiology, with some experts hypothesising that there may be an 'unmasking' process involved. Either way,
tardive dyskinesia adds significantly to the stigmatisation felt by patients with schizophrenia.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
This is a rare and idiosyncratic reaction presenting with fever, clouding of consciousness, muscle rigidity, unstable blood pressure, racing
pulse and changes in levels of the enzyme creatinine phosphokinase. It represents a medical emergency and the mortality for untreated cases
is as high as 18%. Treatment, in addition to general supportive measures and rehydration, involves immediate withdrawal of the offending
antipsychotic and urgent transfer to a medical ward where bromocriptine or dantrolene can be given. Recovery takes approximately 10 days,
shortly after which time most patients can be prescribed another antipsychotic such as olanzapine or clozapine.


Raised prolactin
Most antipsychotics carry the risk of increasing the hormone prolactin. Notable exceptions include aripiprazole, quetiapine and clozapine.
Hyperprolactinaemia arises because most antipsychotics inhibit dopaminergic activity in the tuberoinfundibular system. The secretion of
prolactin by the anterior pituitary gland is normally inhibited by dopamine, so anything that reduces dopaminergic activity is liable to
cause an increase in prolactin. Effects include amenorrhoea, galactorrhoea, sexual dysfunction and osteoporosis. It is therefore important to
monitor prolactin levels from baseline onwards in patients taking most antipsychotics.
Metabolic side effects
Most second-generation antipsychotics carry the risk of weight gain secondary to appetite increase. Clozapine and olanzapine carry the
highest risk. As weight gain is directly linked to the long-term risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus and heart disease, patients taking second-
generation antipsychotics should be advised of the importance of diet and exercise, and supported in their efforts to maintain a healthy
weight. Waist circumference and body mass index (BMI) should be measured regularly, while patients should also have blood tests at least
annually for fasting glucose and lipids. Most importantly, appropriate referral to an endocrinologist or cardiologist should be sought when
abnormalities are detected.
Depot and long-acting injections
Deep intramuscular depot preparations, in which the drug is dissolved in fractionated oil, are normally administered at intervals of 1-4
weeks, allowing the drug to diffuse slowly and evenly into the body's water compartments. Newer long-acting injections work by different
slow-release mechanisms. Advantages include the avoidance of first-pass metabolism and improvement of adherence. As it is not possible
to discontinue depots or long-acting injections quickly in the event of adverse effects occurring, a small test dose is essential when


commencing any depot for the first time. Such a medication should ideally be given at the lowest therapeutic dose and the longest effective
interval.
Treatment-resistant schizophrenia
For treatment-resistant patients who fail to respond to 6-12 months of clozapine therapy, adjuvant medications include amisulpride,
sulpiride, lamotrigine, risperidone, omega-3- triglycerides, haloperidol and nefazodone. Alternatively, olanzapine can be prescribed at high
doses of up to 60 mg daily.
It is worth noting that for patents who recover, the risk of relapse never really disappears. According to an important paper by Shepherd
and colleagues (1989), the overall prognosis of schizophrenia is poor, with only 22% of patients escaping with a single acute episode and no
residual impairment of functioning. More recent evidence has not robustly refuted this. The remainder of patients are found to experience
recurrent episodes, with 35% having little or no residual impairment; 8% experiencing significant, non-progressive impairment; and 35%
enduring significant, progressive impairment.
Treatment of schizoaffective disorder and psychotic depression
These disorders are treated with concomitant use of an antipsychotic and an antidepressant or mood stabiliser to address both affective and
psychotic symptoms.
A note on cost
Second-generation antipsychotics have traditionally been more expensive than their first-generation counterparts but this does not
necessarily make the latter more cost-effective in clinical practice. For example, patients are known to adhere better to second-generation
antipsychotics, thus reducing their likelihood of relapse. Leucht and colleagues (2013) conducted a large meta-analysis of antipsychotic


efficacy and tolerability and found that some second-generation antipsychotics were better on both counts. As the patents of many second-
generation antipsychotics have now lapsed, these medications are increasingly less expensive.
Bipolar affective disorder (ICD-10: F30–31. DSM-5:296/301)
The ICD-10 characterises hypomania as a degree of elevated or irritable mood that lasts at least 4 days and is abnormal for the individual
concerned. In addition, the diagnosis requires the presence of at least three symptoms from a long list that includes increased activity or
restlessness, over-talkativeness, poor concentration, sleeplessness, over-familiarity and reckless behaviour such as overspending.
Mania requires a more significant level of elevated or irritable mood lasting a minimum of a week, with at least three signs from a similar
list to hypomania but also including pressure of speech, racing thoughts, grandiosity and significant disinhibition. For a diagnosis to stand,
mania and hypomania must not be attributable to substance misuse or any organic cause. Of note, up to 20% of manic patients have been
found to have first-rank psychotic symptoms.
An ICD-10 diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder requires a current episode of mania or hypomania in addition to another previous
instance of disturbed mood which, in itself, has met the criteria for a mixed affective, depressive, hypomanic or manic episode with or
without psychotic symptoms. Of note, rapid-cycling bipolar affective disorder is characterised in the DSM-5 by four or more episodes of mood
disturbances in a single year. Bipolar affective disorder affects men and women equally, the peak age of onset being 20-30 years. So, how
might we treat mania, hypomania and bipolar affective disorder?
Initial treatment of manic and hypomanic patients
For patients presenting with mania or hypomania, evidence suggests that antipsychotic medications may be more effective than mood
stabilisers alone. Patients already taking a mood stabiliser such as lithium or sodium valproate should still have their plasma level checked
and their dosage optimised. Adherence to established medications should be considered. An antipsychotic (e.g. haloperidol or olanzapine)

can be added, with evaluation over 1-2 weeks, at which point it can be either withdrawn or used as prophylaxis against future manic
episodes. The newest antipsychotic used for the treatment of mania is asenapine, which is taken sublingually. A benzodiazepine (e.g.
lorazepam) may also be prescribed, evaluated over a 2-3 day period and withdrawn after resolution of symptoms.
Mood stabilisers
Lithium
Lithium is used as prophylaxis against both bipolar and unipolar affective disorders, as well as in the treatment of acute mania. It is also used
to augment the action of antidepressants in patients with treatment-resistant depression. Blood tests are essential when using lithium and
include plasma levels, which should be monitored every week until a safe and effective dosage is reached. Plasma levels should lie between
0.5 and 1.2 mmol/l and are taken routinely during maintenance every 3 months. It is important that any blood samples for lithium be taken
12 hours post-dose. As lithium bypasses the liver entirely and is excreted through the kidneys, renal function should be checked every 6
months. Moreover, as hypothyroidism occurs in 3-4% of patients on lithium, thyroid function should also be monitored every 6 months.
The early side effects of lithium include thirst, nausea, loose bowel motions, fine tremor and polyurea, while other side effects that occur
in up to 30% of patients include weight gain, oedema, cardiac changes, nasal congestion and tardive dyskinesia. When plasma levels exceed
1.5 mmol/l, toxic effects can occur and include anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea, coarse tremor, unsteady gait, slurred speech, confusion,
drowsiness, eye changes, muscle twitching and convulsions. Very high levels of lithium can be fatal. Pregnancy is a relative contraindication
to lithium therapy, especially in the first trimester when there is a 1 in 1,000 risk of the congenital defect Ebstein's anomaly. Other
contraindications include thyroid disorders and compromised renal function, both of which are more likely in the elderly. Lithium interacts
with non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), haloperidol, thiazide diuretics, alcohol and a variety of cardioactive medications.
Bipolar patients who become depressed may need augmentation of their lithium (or other mood stabiliser) with a bipolar antidepressant
such as quetiapine or lamotrigine (or even a conventional antidepressant, although this carries an increased risk of mania). Others


experiencing rapid-cycling disorder may require augmentation with another mood stabiliser. Finally, care should be taken when
discontinuing lithium as a 'rebound' relapse may sometimes occur.
Sodium valproate
Sodium valproate, which works by inhibiting the enzyme GABA-transaminase, is used to treat mania, refractory bipolar affective
disorder and rapid-cycling disorder. It represents the first-line anticonvulsant for preventing clozapine-induced seizures and may be used
prophylactically when the serum clozapine is above the reference range.
Adverse effects of sodium valproate include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, sedation, tremor, weight gain, unsteady gait and slurred speech,
while rare side effects such as a low platelet count and toxicity to the liver and pancreas may also occur. Some adverse effects are dose-
dependent and, as such, occasional serum valproate levels can be useful in helping to determine the most acceptable dose. Sodium valproate
may interact with lithium, antipsychotics, *warfarin* and aspirin and is contraindicated in women of childbearing age because of the risk of
foetal neural tube defects.
The response rates to mood-stabilising medication vary depending upon the context in which the manic event or bipolar illness occur.
Overall, the rates are estimated at approximately 50% but may be as low as 30% in patients with a rapid-cycling disorder and as high as 70%
in patients experiencing acute mania.
Carbamazepine
Carbamazepine works by slowing down the recovery time of sodium channels in the nervous system. It has been shown to be as effective as
lithium in preventing relapses of bipolar affective disorder and is also useful in treating rapid-cycling disorder. It is, however, thought to be
less effective in the treatment of acute mania.
Its side effects include drowsiness, double vision, unsteady gait, rashes, headache, hypothyroidism and blood abnormalities such as
*agranulocytosis* and *leukopenia*. Regular blood tests, therefore, include thyroid function tests and a full blood count, in addition to occasional

serum carbamazepine levels. There is no universally accepted therapeutic window for the medication, but 4-12 mg/l is a reasonable
guideline. Pregnancy is a contraindication to carbamazepine because neural tube defects may occur, while important interactions occur with
antipsychotics, MAOIs, lithium and clozapine.
Depression (ICD-10: F32-33. DSM-5: 296/300-1)
Depression is a common psychiatric illness whose prevalence appears to be on the increase. The overall lifetime risk for affective disorders
probably exceeds 20%, while it remains commoner in women. For an ICD-10 diagnosis of depression, the episode must last at least 2 weeks,
with a history of manic or hypomanic episodes absent, and substance abuse and organic illness ruled out as aetiological factors. Illness
severity and the presence or absence of somatic symptoms naturally varies within the disorder. Severe depression can be accompanied by
psychotic symptoms.
Neurotransmitter hypothesis of affective disorders
Before we examine the pharmacotherapy used to treat affective disorders, it is important to note the hypothesis upon which depression
and mania are based. The monoamine hypothesis of affective disorders states that depression is due to a functional deficit of monoamine
neurotransmitters such as serotonin and noradrenaline, while mania is due to their functional excess.
Evidence to support this theory includes the observation that mood improves in patients treated with tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs),
which are known to block monoamine reuptake in the synapse. Similarly, mood improves in patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOIs), which prevent the breakdown of monoamines in the synapse; and in patients receiving electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), which is
believed to work by increasing central responses to monoamines. Moreover, the antihypertensive drugs reserpine, which reduces monoamine
storage, and methyldopa, which inhibits noradrenaline synthesis, are both noted to cause depression.

The monoamine hypothesis does not account for all available data on neurotransmitters and depression. We still have not worked out, for
example, why cocaine and amphetamines inhibit noradrenaline uptake and yet fail to have any effect on depression or why antidepressants
have delayed clinical efficacy despite their immediate effects on monoamine transmission. Nonetheless, the monoamine hypothesis provides
us with a solid theoretical model upon which many effective therapies are based.
With this in mind, the decision to use an antidepressant should be based on a discussion with the patient about the best choice
of medication, the likely outcomes (including adverse or discontinuation effects) and the fact that it often takes a few weeks for
antidepressants to work. A starting dose is prescribed and assessed over 2-4 weeks, followed by gradual titration upwards according to
response. Should this prove ineffective, a second antidepressant of a different class may be tried before moving to the suggested treatments
for refractory depression described later. An effective antidepressant should be continued for 6-9 months after resolution of symptoms and
withdrawn gradually over 2-4 weeks to avoid re-emergence of symptoms. A synopsis of antidepressants is given later.
Older antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) include most of the older varieties of antidepressant, which work by inhibiting the reuptake of
noradrenaline and serotonin in the synapse. They were, for many years, considered the gold standard treatment for depression, but have
become less popular recently due to their numerous associated adverse effects. Such effects mean that poor adherence can be a serious issue
with TCAs, while particular varieties such as amitriptyline and dosulepin can be exceptionally dangerous in overdose. Table 7.2 presents
treatment indications, daily dosages and half-lives of commonly used TCAS.
The adverse effects of TCAs are related to the blockade of specific neurotransmitter receptors. For example, anticholinergic effects - dry
mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention and constipation - are associated with muscarinic M1 receptors and are worst with desipramine and

nortriptyline. While some patients develop a tolerance for anticholinergic effects within a week or two, the effects can be minimised further
by titrating the dosage gradually or by using less anticholinergic TCAs such as amitriptyline or imipramine.
Table 7.2 Commonly used TCAs, treatment indicators, daily dosages and half-lives
Name
Indications (depression and:)
Daily dosage
Half-life Notes
Amitriptyline Childhood enuresis; migraine
10-150 mg
8-24 hrs
Metabolised to nortriptyline
Nortriptyline As above
20-150 mg
18-96 hrs
Useful in the elderly
Imipramine As above
75-300 mg
4-18 hrs
Metabolised to desipramine
Desipramine Nil
75-200 mg
12-24 hrs
Dosulepin Nil
75-225 mg
11-40 hrs
Lofepramine Nil
70-210 mg up to
1.5-6 hrs Used in elderly less
TDS
cardiotoxic:
Clomipramine OCD; phobic states; cataplexy assoc. with
10-250 mg
17-28 hrs
narcolepsy
Meanwhile, side effects associated with alpha-1-adrenergic receptors include postural hypotension, dizziness and cardiac arrhythmias,
while histamine H1 receptors are linked to weight gain and sedation. The latter occurs more with amitriptyline and dosulepin than with
nortriptyline or imipramine. Of note, as TCAs are associated with various ECG changes such as heart block, they are contraindicated in

patients with a significant cardiac history. Other contraindications include enlarged prostate and narrow angle glaucoma, while care should
be taken in patients with epilepsy or diseases of the liver and kidney.
TCAs interact with several other important drugs, increasing the effects of alcohol, hypnotics, anxiolytics, antipsychotics, noradrenaline
and adrenaline, while reducing the action of some antihypertensives. In particular, TCAs may interact with MAOIs to produce central
nervous excitation, hyperpyrexia and coma, trimipramine being the least likely TCA to do this. Finally, TCAs should be discontinued
gradually to avoid the risk of a cholinergic rebound syndrome.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
The enzyme monoamine oxidase, which metabolises a variety of neurotransmitters in the synapse, has two types of pharmacological
inhibitor: irreversible and reversible. Irreversible monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) inhibit monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) in the
gastrointestinal tract and monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) in the brain. As MAO-A preferentially breaks down serotonin and noradrenaline,
its inhibitors are ideal for treating depression.
The irreversible MAOIs include drugs such as phenelzine, tranylcypromine and isocarboxazid and are generally reserved for patients with
treatment-resistant depression. Phenelzine has traditionally had a role in treating phobias, panic disorder and atypical, non-biological types
of depression, especially those associated with anxiety and hypochondriacal symptoms. The use of MAOIs, however, needs to be monitored
closely. Possible adverse effects include orthostatic hypotension, oedema, insomnia, sexual dysfunction, weight gain, liver damage and
psychosis. Phaeochromocytoma is an absolute contraindication, while relative contraindications include cardiovascular disease, liver disease,
diabetes, epilepsy and hyperthyroidism.
The importance of special dietary restrictions in patients taking MAOIs cannot be overemphasised. Foods rich in tyramine and drugs
containing amines must be avoided at all costs because gastrointestinal MAO-A is also responsible for breaking down tyramine in the diet.

If the latter is not metabolised, it builds up rapidly in the body and causes the release of noradrenaline which, in turn, leads to a sudden
pounding headache and potentially fatal rise in blood pressure otherwise known as the 'cheese reaction'.
Cheese is not the only food rich in tyramine, however. Other foods which must be avoided include sources of degraded protein such as
liver, hung game, pickled herring, smoked fish and pâté. Fava and broad bean pods are also off the menu, as are beer, Chianti wine, avocados
and yeast or protein extracts such as Marmite, Bovril and Oxo. Drugs to be avoided include pethidine, morphine, cocaine, selective serotonin
uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), anaesthetics containing adrenaline and many commonly used cold and flu remedies. Such restrictions remain in
place for at least 2 weeks after the MAOI is discontinued.
Reversible inhibitors of monoamine oxidase A
Reversible inhibitors of monoamine oxidase A (RIMAs) such as moclobemide are far less likely to cause the cheese reaction although the risk
is by no means completely absent. Moderate quantities of mature cheese, for example, may still cause difficulty but nonetheless, stringent
dietary restrictions are usually not required. The efficacy of RIMAs is similar to that of SSRIs and TCAs, while their side effects include
insomnia, nausea, agitation and confusion. Of note, interactions can occur with cimetidine, pethidine and SSRIs, while caution should be
exercised in patients using TCAs.
Newer antidepressants
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
SSRIs selectively inhibit the reuptake of serotonin in the synapse. They have several advantages over TCAs, largely related to their more
acceptable side effect profile at effective dosages and leading, in turn, to better adherence. In addition, fewer cardiotoxic side effects make
SSRIs the drug of choice in depressed cardiac patients, while they are also considerably safer in overdose. They are useful in a variety of
disorders additional to depression but may be less effective in severe depression. A synopsis of the commonly used SSRIs is given in Table 7.3.

Adverse effects are reported less frequently with SSRIs than with other antidepressants. Nausea and diarrhoea are common, occurring in
over a quarter of patients, with dry mouth in up to a fifth of cases. Sexual dysfunction can occur in up to 70% of patients but is probably
under-reported in clinical practice. Insomnia and loss of appetite have been reported with most SSRIs. Sedation occurs in up to a fifth
of patients taking paroxetine or fluoxetine, while anxiety symptoms occur in around 15%. Like most antidepressants, SSRIs can also be
associated with hyponatraemia.
The serotonergic syndrome is a more serious adverse effect, thought to be due to enhanced serotonergic transmission in the brain stem. It
can occur with SSRIs, lithium and MAOIs, and presents with fever, restlessness, agitation, diarrhoea, stomach cramps, tremor, exaggerated
reflexes and impaired consciousness. Indeed, it is not unlike the neuroleptic malignant syndrome mentioned earlier and can be fatal if left
untreated.
Withdrawal symptoms have been reported occasionally with SSRIs, especially paroxetine which has a short half-life. Gradual withdrawal
is therefore advised to avoid such symptoms, which include headache, dizziness, nausea, paraesthesia, sweating, tremor and occasional
dystonias. There are no absolute contraindications to SSRIs although caution is advised for patients with epilepsy. It is important to note that
SSRIs can interact badly with MAOIs, leading to excitation of the central nervous system, hyperpyrexia and even coma. Some SSRIs, moreover,
may interact with other drugs such as propranolol, oral anticoagulants, phenytoin, carbamazepine and haloperidol.
Table 7.3 Commonly used SSRIs, treatment indicators, daily dosages and half-lives
Name
Fluoxetine
Sertraline
Indications (depression and ...)
Bulimia nervosa; OCD
OCD
Daily dosage Half-life
Notes
20-60 mg
24-140 hrs
50-200 mg
24-26 hrs
Not very sedating
Can raise LFTS

Citalopram/Escitalopram Panic disorder +/- agoraphobia
Paroxetine
OCD; social phobia; panic disorder +/-
agoraphobia
Fluvoxamine
OCD

20-40 mg
20-60 mg

100-300 mg

33 hrs
24 hrs

15-22 hrs

Potential to prolong QTc
Withdrawal effects

Nausea more likely

Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors
Venlafaxine has pharmacological effects similar to the TCAs. Although its half-life is only 5 hours, while that of its active metabolite is 10
hours, a longer-acting XL preparation is also available. The latter is used in depression at dosages of 75-225 mg, while higher dosages have
more influence over noradrenergic transmission and are used in generalised anxiety disorder.
The adverse effects of venlafaxine are relatively few in number due to its low affinity for cholinergic, histaminergic and alpha-1-adrenergic
receptors. Nausea, hypertension and sexual dysfunction may occur, while caution should be exercised in patients with hepatic or renal
impairment. Moreover, it is avoided in patients taking MAOIs due to the risk of the serotonergic syndrome.
Duloxetine - a more recent serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor – is similar to venlafaxine but has the relative advantage of a
12-hour half-life. It is useful for depression and generalised anxiety disorder. It is prescribed at dosages of 60-120 mg daily, although there
is little robust evidence to support using more than 60 mg per day. Its main side effects include nausea, insomnia, headache, dizziness,
constipation and loss of appetite. It can cause small increases in blood pressure and is best avoided with MAOIs.
Noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antagonists
Mirtazapine is a noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antagonist (NaSSA) useful for treating major depression. It is prescribed at dosages
of 15-45 mg daily and it has a half-life of 20-40 hours, which is longer than many antidepressants. Side effects include increased

appetite with weight gain, sedation (paradoxically more so at lower dosages), dizziness and headache. It is relatively less likely than other
antidepressants to cause nausea, sexual dysfunction and hyponatraemia.
Melatonergic antidepressants
Agomelatine is the most recent development in commercially available antidepressants. It is prescribed for major depression at dosages of
25-50 mg daily and has a half-life of 1-2 hours. Side effects include nausea, dizziness, headache, sleep disturbance and changes in liver
function. Regarding the latter, it is important to monitor liver function blood tests for anyone prescribed agomelatine. It interacts with
medications such as fluvoxamine and the antibiotic ciprofloxacin.
Selective noradrenergic reuptake inhibitors
Reboxetine is prescribed at 8-12 mg daily and has a half-life of 13 hours. A meta-analysis in the Lancet by Cipriani and colleagues (2009)
found reboxetine to be significantly less efficacious than all the other antidepressants tested (mirtazapine, venlafaxine, escitalopram and
sertraline were found to be the most effective antidepressants, with the last two showing the most acceptable side effect profile).
Electroconvulsive therapy
It was in 1938 that Cerletti and Bini first used electricity to induce a seizure in a mute catatonic patient, based on the earlier research of
physicians such as Phillipus Paracelcus and Ladislas von Meduna. General anaesthetics were first used for ECT in 1951 and, since then, ECT
has been researched and refined further in order to increase its efficacy and reduce its side effects.
ECT is currently the most effective treatment available for severe depression, especially where antidepressants have failed, where
medicinal adverse effects have not been tolerated or where patients have previously responded well to ECT (Royal College of Psychiatrists,
2005). Other indications include postnatal or psychotic depression and low mood associated with psychomotor retardation, where ECT may
indeed be life-saving, for example in the context of a suicidal patient who cannot afford to wait 2 weeks for antidepressants to work.


Up to 80% of patients with acute mania respond to ECT, including many whose illnesses were resistant to the combined use of lithium and
antipsychotics. The relapse rate, however, is higher for manic patients than for their depressive counterparts. Finally, ECT may also be used
in catatonic stupor, various neurological conditions such as Parkinson's disease, and affective disorders associated with multiple sclerosis.
Despite a widespread confidence in the efficacy of ECT, many respected clinicians over the years have voiced dissatisfaction with the
available evidence. For example, an article in the Psychologist by Johnstone (2003) highlights a number of ongoing concerns regarding ethics,
efficacy, the potential physical and psychological harm, and how little we know about the mechanism of action. Recalling Greenblatt and
colleagues (1964) and the claim that ECT is effective in 8 out of 10 cases, the article also reminds us that Buchan and colleagues (1992)
conversely found the procedure to be little better than placebo. Different studies have come to different conclusions; meanwhile the article
makes a valid point that ECT research – like much of psychiatry - is still very much in its infancy.
Although we are still unsure of the mechanism by which ECT works so successfully, several plausible theories exist. One hypothesis draws
a correlation between the manner in which ECT raises the seizure threshold and improves mood, and compares this to the mood-stabilising
properties of anticonvulsant medications such as sodium valproate and carbamazepine. Another theory suggests that changes in blood-brain
barrier permeability associated with ECT may lead to improved mood, whilst yet another hypothesis notes EEG and neurochemical changes
seen after the procedure. Notwithstanding the theories, a definitive mechanism is yet to be found.
ECT is normally given two or three times per week with, on average, 6 to 12 procedures performed in total. Informed, written consent is
required, while routine blood tests, an ECG, a chest X-ray and an anaesthetic review are normally necessary prior to the first session. As with
any procedure requiring anaesthetic, patient must fast for 12 hours prior to each session.
During the procedure, blood pressure, heart rate and blood oxygen saturation are all monitored along with an electroencephalogram (EEG)
reading. An intravenous anaesthetic is administered along with a muscle relaxant, before a few seconds of 100% oxygen is given via a mask.
The electrodes are then placed in position near the temples before a small current is passed, lasting less than a second and producing a
seizure that usually lasts 15-45 seconds.

Minutes later, the patient wakes up and may experience a brief period of confusion, headache or muscle stiffness which rarely lasts more
than an hour. Short-term memory loss - perhaps the most famous side effect of ECT - may span a few days but rarely persists beyond 1
month. Overall, the mortality rate for ECT is 2 in 100,000, no more than that associated with the general anaesthetic. The procedure is a
safe and effective means of treating severe depression, especially if a maintenance course of antidepressants is prescribed afterwards to help
avoid relapse.
Treatment of refractory depression
There are a number of options open to patients who do not respond to antidepressants and psychotherapy alone. According to the STAR*D
study, bupropion and buspirone can be used to augment venlafaxine or sertraline, while augmentation with sufficient lithium to achieve a
plasma level of 0.4-0.6 mmol/l has been shown to ameliorate symptoms in approximately 50% of patients (Sinyor et al., 2010). The latter
naturally carries the risk of side effects associated with lithium and hence requires plasma monitoring. Augmentation with tri-iodothyronine
at dosages of 20-50 mcg daily can also prove expedient, although it normally requires specialist supervision and regular monitoring
of thyroid function. Combinations of antidepressants can be effective, including that of venlafaxine with mirtazapine. The addition of
olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, aripiprazole or lamotrigine to an SSRI also has an evolving evidence base. Finally, in treatment-resistant
cases or in emergencies, ECT can also be used as outlined earlier.
So, what is the overall outcome of treatment? It has been reported that around 50% of patients recover within 6 months while the
psychological health of a further 25% is restored within a year. However, 10% are found to experience persistent treatment-resistant
depression while 75% of recovered patients relapse within a 10-year period.
Anxiety disorders (ICD-10: F40–43. DSM-5: 300/308–9)
The ICD-10 categorises neurotic and stress-related disorders into phobic disorders, including agoraphobia, social phobias and specific


phobias; other anxiety disorders, such as panic disorder and generalised anxiety disorder; obsessive-compulsive disorder; and reactions to severe
stress incorporating adjustment disorders. Although each category has different diagnostic requirements, symptoms are broadly grouped
into those involving autonomic arousal, the chest and abdomen, the mental state, and general symptoms.
Anxiety disorders are relatively common. Estimates suggest that lifetime prevalence varies between 1-2% for panic disorder and 10-15%
for social phobia, while the overall lifetime risk for anxiety disorders is 15-20%. Reported rates are higher in women for all types of anxiety
disorder except social phobia, where rates are equal between genders. So, with this in mind, how do we treat anxiety disorders?
Cognitive behavioural therapy almost always represents the first-line option, depending on the clinical aspects in question, the patient's
suitability and the availability of an appropriately trained therapist. Good education of patients and carers is obviously a necessity, while
medications such as SSRIs and other antidepressants may also be called upon where there is comorbid depression, severely debilitating
symptoms or failure of CBT alone. In situations where the combination of CBT and medication proves unsuccessful, a review of the diagnosis
may be necessary, including examination of lifestyle issues such as caffeine consumption and drug abuse, and investigation for possible
organic aetiology.
Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines, which work by increasing GABA function in the synapse, are used in the short-term management of anxiety that is severe
and disabling. They were first introduced in the 1960s as a 'safe' alternative to barbiturates and became so successful that, before long, they
were viewed as a panacea for every anxiety-related problem from broken marriage to redundancy. Indeed, at the height of their popularity,
31 million NHS prescriptions for benzodiazepines were being given out per year – enough to sedate three out of every four adults in the UK!
Unsurprisingly, withdrawal and tolerance effects soon became apparent, the latter developing in as few as 14 days. The result is that there
are now strict prescribing guidelines issued by the College of Psychiatry of Ireland (2012), for example, that benzodiazepines should not be
prescribed for more than 4 consecutive weeks.


The symptoms of benzodiazepine withdrawal can include rebound anxiety, sweating, agitation, irritability, insomnia, muscle tension,
nausea, lethargy, unsteady gait and blurred vision, while seizures and persecutory delusions may also rarely occur. To avoid such symptoms,
addicted patients should be weaned off their benzodiazepines by substituting with an equivalent dose of diazepam and then reducing the
latter very gradually. Diazepam is the medication of choice because of its long half-life (up to 100 hours). The half-lives of other commonly
used benzodiazepines are shown in Table 7.4.
Table 7.4 Benzodiazepines and their associated half-lives
Benzodiazepine
Clonazepam
Chlordiazepoxide
Nitrazepam
Lorazepam
Temazepam
Oxazepam
Half-life
20-40 hrs
5-30 hrs
24-40 hrs
8-20 hrs
6-15 hrs
6-20 hrs
The adverse effects of benzodiazepines include drowsiness, unsteady gait and paradoxical aggression, while coordination may become
impoverished and thus extreme care should be taken while driving or operating machinery. The use of benzodiazepines during pregnancy

can result in foetal anomalies such as a cleft lip and palate. The effects of benzodiazepines are exaggerated by alcohol, barbiturates, TCAs and
antihistamines, while their levels are increased by fluoxetine.
Pregabalin
Pregabalin binds to voltage-dependent calcium channels in the central nervous system and is used to treat generalised anxiety disorder.
Although dependence is less common than with benzodiazepines, it has been reported. It is prescribed at dosages from 150 mg to 600 mg
daily (usually in 2-3 divided dosages). Abrupt discontinuation carries a risk of seizures.
Buspirone
Buspirone is a serotonin agonist that, unlike benzodiazepines, does not act directly on GABA, although it may have an indirect effect via
dopamine. Used for the short-term management of generalised anxiety disorder at dosages of up to 60 mg, buspirone does not cause
significant sedation or cognitive impairment and carries a low risk of dependence and withdrawal symptoms. Its anxiolytic effect, however,
occurs gradually over 1-3 weeks, giving it little advantage over the SSRIs. Its main adverse effects include dizziness, headache and light-
headedness but it does not increase the sedative effects of alcohol.
Treatment of specific anxiety disorders
Agoraphobia and panic disorder
In agoraphobia, a patient feels anxious about certain situations from which escape may be difficult or where help may not be available
should a situational panic attack occur. This usually leads to avoidance of such situations - typically crowded public places (agoraphobia
literally means 'fear of the marketplace'). Panic disorder, meanwhile, involves sudden, unexpected, short periods of intense anxiety with a
sense of imminent danger and a need to escape. Panic attacks tend to last around 10 minutes but may continue for an hour or more, while

the associated severe anxiety symptoms typically include dizziness, palpitations, sweating, nausea, abdominal cramps, breathlessness, chest
discomfort and depersonalisation.
Should CBT fail to work, SSRIs may be used, although their effects can be delayed for as long as 6 weeks. Up to 40% of panic disorder
patients commencing an SSRI experience an activation syndrome with increased levels of agitation, while around half of patients relapse
when the drug is discontinued. Treatment, therefore, should continue for at least 12 months, at which point the dosage should be tapered
slowly downwards by 25% every 2 months to avoid a relapse. Alternatives to SSRIs include clomipramine or other TCAs, but the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE, 2011) recommends that benzodiazepines not be used for panic disorder.
Social phobias and specific phobias
Where CBT fails to ameliorate social phobia, SSRIs, TCAS, MAOIS or RIMAS (or occasionally benzodiazepines) become the drugs of choice,
while beta blockers (e.g. propranolol 20-60 mg) are sometimes used for symptomatic relief in performance anxiety. Specific phobias are
treated with CBT, while pharmacotherapy is usually inappropriate except in one-off circumstances.
Generalised anxiety disorder
Generalised anxiety disorder involves excessive anxiety lasting at least 6 months and interfering with an individual's ability to cope with
everyday demands at home, at work and socially. Symptoms commonly include prominent tension and worry; feelings of apprehension;
autonomic arousal symptoms such as tachycardia; muscle-tension; nausea, diarrhoea and abdominal discomfort; tension headaches;
difficulty concentrating; sleep disturbance; and low mood.
In terms of treatment, CBT is once again the first-line option, while severe illness or significant comorbidity may necessitate an SSRI, an
SNRI, pregabalin or buspirone. Benzodiazepines with a long half-life may occasionally be used but only in accordance with guidelines.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Obsessive-compulsive disorder is characterised by at least a 2-week period of recurrent, unpleasant, egodystonic ruminations that are


resisted by the patient and may, in turn, lead to compulsive acts in order to reduce anxiety. In addition to CBT, management options include
SSRIs and clomipramine.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder arises after an exceptionally threatening event outside the range of normal experience. Symptoms typically
include a repeated reliving of the trauma (including flashbacks and nightmares), marked irritability or hyperarousal, and avoidance of
situations that serve as a reminder of the trauma. The role of benzodiazepines is particularly limited in post-traumatic stress disorder, with
SSRIS, MAOIS, RIMAs or sodium valproate comprising better options where CBT fails.
Sleep disorders and sexual dysfunction (ICD-10: F51–52. DSM-5: 302/307)
The ICD-10 divides non-organic sleep disorders into insomnia, hypersomnia, disorders of the sleep-wake cycle, somnambulism, sleep
terrors, nightmares and various others ailments. Sexual disorders, on the other hand, are categorised into those affecting sexual desire
and enjoyment, genital response, inability to experience orgasm, premature ejaculation, non-organic vaginismus and excessive sexual drive.
Sexual dysfunction is common among psychiatry service users, partly due to the side effects of medication, but may be under-reported.
For example, on self-report questionnaires, 15% of patients taking SSRIs admit to sexual dysfunction, and this figure increases to 70% on
further questioning. Note also the high prolactin levels associated with some antipsychotics. The treatment of sleep disorders and sexual
dysfunction are briefly summarised later.
Sleep disorders
Insomnia, the commonest sleep disorder, may be divided into initial insomnia, middle insomnia and early morning wakening, depending
on the timing of the symptoms. As the aetiology may be physical (e.g. pain) or environmental (e.g. noise), it is important to take a detailed
history and initiate appropriate pain relief or education regarding sleep hygiene before considering hypnotics.


Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used, newer non-benzodiazepine hypnotics such as zolpidem, zopiclone and zaleplon, are
becoming increasingly popular (see Table 7.5).
Table 7.5 Drugs with hypnotic properties, their chemical types and half-lives
Drug
Chemical type
Half-life
Notes
Zolpidem
Imidazopyridine
1-3 hrs
Reduces sleep latency
Zopiclone
Cyclopyrrolone
3-6 hrs
Reduces sleep latency Increases sleep length
Zaleplon
Pyrazolopyrimidine
1 hr
Fewer side effects
These drugs act rapidly with minimal hangover effects. However long-term use is not recommended as addiction and withdrawal
symptoms have been reported. Prolonged-release melatonin is a non-addictive melatonin receptor agonist that enhances sleep in patients
over 55 years of age.
Sexual dysfunction
Management primarily includes education, in addition to pharmacological measures such as sildenafil for erectile dysfunction.
Facilitating adherence
Good adherence to medication is a crucial aspect of treatment. Indeed, non-adherence is enormously significant from both the perspective


of an individual's quality of life and the overall economic and social implications. For example, one study suggests that full adherence to
antipsychotic medication would reduce the personal and financial burden of schizophrenia by 50%. Moreover, a Cochrane Review meta-
analysis has concluded that non-adherence limits the full benefits of medication, while current methods of improving adherence in chronic
health problems are complex and ineffective (Haynes et al., 2004). The importance of a good therapeutic alliance between clinician and
patient cannot be emphasised enough. The following factors increase adherence:
1. Collaborative decision making involving clear information regarding the purposes and expected outcomes of the medication, including
efficacy, tolerability and adverse effects.
2. A simple drug regime with clear instructions on the medication container as to how and when the drugs should be taken.
3. Ensuring medication is dispensed and collected, enlisting the assistance of community pharmacies, community psychiatric nurses,
relatives and carers where possible.
4. Use of an attractive formulation.
5. Monitoring of adherence with regular outpatient feedback sessions and formalised rating of symptoms and side effects.
6. Facilitation of good insight and positive engagement in therapy.
7. Appropriate support for carers and relatives, with adequate psychoeducation to enhance the working alliance and address any
ambivalence towards medication.
Summary
This chapter has placed considerable emphasis on the pharmacotherapy of psychological morbidity principally to complement the various
psychological approaches outlined in other chapters of the book. It is important to remind ourselves that the appropriate therapy for any
given aliment is always a question of emphasis within a multidisciplinary approach, with all appropriate therapeutic options explored for


each patient. In this manner, we can hope to ameliorate at least some psychiatric illness and improve quality of life. Perhaps we may even
prove Voltaire wrong!
Glossary
agonist
A substance that acts at a cell receptor site and triggers a response.
agranulocytosis
A disorder where there is a severe deficiency of certain types of white blood cell.
antagonist
A substance that occupies a cell receptor site and produces no response.
blood-brain barrier
A semi-permeable membrane which separates the body's circulating blood from the tissue fluids surrounding the brain cells.
catatonia
A state in which a person becomes mute or stuperous and adopts bizarre postures; a noted feature of schizophrenia.
depot
A means of administration whereby a medication is dissolved in fractionated oil and delivered intramuscularly, allowing slow release
over a number of weeks.
epithelial cell
The epithelium is a sheet of tightly bound cells lining any internal or external surface in an organism (e.g. the epidermis of the skin).
Ebstein's anomaly
Congenital heart defect affecting the tricuspid valve.
festinant gait
Short, shuffling steps seen in patients with Parkinsonism.

Gilles de la Tourette
A syndrome involving severe multiple tics and involuntary, obscene speech.
glaucoma
A condition whereby loss of vision occurs due to abnormally high pressure in the eye.
glomerular filtration
Part of the mechanism whereby substances are excreted by the kidney. Such substances pass through a network of capillaries known
as the glomerulus and enter the renal tubules.
half-life
The time taken for a drug to drop to half its peak plasma concentration.
heart block
A heart condition in which conduction of electrical impulses from the natural pacemaker is impaired, leading to a slow, inefficient
pumping action.
hyperpyrexia
A rise in body temperature above 41 degrees centigrade.
hyponatraemia
Abnormally low levels of sodium in the blood.
leukopenia
A reduction in the number of leukocytes (a type of white blood cell).
monoamine
A type of chemical neurotransmitter (e.g. adrenaline, dopamine and serotonin).
neutropenia
A decrease in the number of neutrophils (a type of white blood cell).
orthostatic hypotension
Low blood pressure found primarily while standing upright.
paraesthesia

Abnormal tingling sensations sometimes referred to as 'pins and needles'.
parenteral
Administered by any route other than the mouth or rectum.
passive diffusion
The movement of a substance across a membrane without the help of active chemical transporters.
phaeochromocytoma
A small tumour of the blood vessels in the adrenal gland. By causing the unregulated secretion of adrenaline and noradrenaline, blood
pressure may become raised.
polyurea
Production of a large volume of pale, dilute urine.
topical
Administered directly to the part being treated (e.g. to skin or eye).
torticollis
An irresistible and persistent turning of the head to one side due to spasm of the neck muscles.
Exercises
In pairs, role-play part of a session with a client, John, with whom you are working on a psychological intervention for depression.
John, who has had many episodes of depression and tried many medications, mentions that he has stopped taking medication. He
has questions and concerns about medication, particularly about side effects. He has a scheduled outpatient appointment with his
psychiatrist the following day. Work with John to (1) clarify his questions and concerns and (2) plan how best he may get his
questions addressed at the outpatient psychiatry appointment, using role-play with him where appropriate. It may be helpful for John

to write down questions to bring to the appointment, or to bring a spouse, friend or other advocate, notebook or tape recorder to the
appointment.
Websites for clients
Headmeds: http://www.headmeds.org.uk
Medicines.ie: http://www.medicines.ie
Choice and medication: http://www.choiceandmedication.org/stjohnofgodhospital
Websites for practitioners
British Association for Psychopharmacology: http://www.bap.org.uk
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: http://www.nice.org.uk
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network: http://www.sign.ac.uk
Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression (STAR*D): http://www.edc.gsph.pitt.edu/stard
Further reading for practitioners
American Psychiatric Association. (2001). Task Force Report of the APA on the Practice of Electroconvulsive Therapy Recommendations for
Treatment, Training, and Privileging (Second Edition). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.


Bazire, S. (2013). The Psychotropic Drug Directory 2014: The Professionals' Pocket Handbook and Aide Memoire. Cheltenham: Lloyd-
Reinhold Communications.
Bezchlibnyk-Butler, K., Jeffries, J., Procyshyn, R., et al. (2013). Clinical Handbook of Psychotropic Drugs (Twentieth Edition). New York:
Hogrefe Publishing.
Brayfield, A. (Ed.). (2014). Martindale: The Complete Drug Reference (Thirty-Eighth Edition). London: Pharmaceutical Press.
Cowen, P., Harrison, P., Burns, T., et al. (2012). Shorter Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry (Sixth Edition). Oxford: Oxford Medical Publications.
Joint Formulary Committee. (2014). British National Formulary (Sixty-Seventh Edition). London: Pharmaceutical Press.
Nathan, P., & Gorman, J. (2007). A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition). New York: Oxford University Press.
Perry, P., Alexander, B., Liskow, B., & DeVane, C. (2006). Psychotropic Drug Handbook (Eighth Edition). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott,
Williams and Wilkins.
Schatzberg, A., Cole, J., & DeBattista, C. (2010). Manual of Clinical Psychopharmacology (Seventh Edition). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press.
Stahl, S. (2013). Stahl's Essential Psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications (Fourth Edition). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, D., Paton, C., & Kapur, S. (2014). The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (Twelfth Edition). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Wills, S. (2005). Drugs of Abuse (Second Edition). London: Pharmaceutical Press.
Wright, P., Stern, J., & Phelan, M. (2012). Core Psychiatry (Third Edition). London: Saunders.


References
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Association.
Bleuler, E. (1911). Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias. New York: International University Press.
Buchan, H., Johnstone, E., McPherson, K., Palmer, R., Crow, T. J., & Brandon, S. (1992). Who benefits from electroconvulsive therapy?
British Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 349-355.
Cipriani, A., Furukawa, T., Salanti, G., Geddes, J., Higgins, J., Churchill, R.,. (2009). Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 12 new-
generation antidepressants: a multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Lancet, 373(9665), 746-758.
College of Psychiatry of Ireland. (2012). A Consensus Statement on the Use of Benzodiazepines in Specialist Mental Health Services. Dublin:
College of Psychiatry of Ireland.
Greenblatt, M., Grosser, G., & Wechsler, H. (1964). Differential response of hospitalised depressed patients to somatic therapy. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 120, 935-943.
Haynes, R., McDonald, H., Garg, A., & Montague, P. (2004). Interventions for helping patients to follow prescriptions for medications.
Cochrane Library, Issue 1. Chichester: Wiley.
Johnstone, L. (2003). A shocking treatment. The Psychologist, 16, 236-239.
Leucht, S., Cipriani, A., Spineli, L., Mavridis, D., Orey, D., Richter, F.,. (2013). Comparative efficacy and tolerability of 15 antipsychotic
drugs in schizophrenia: A multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Lancet, 382(9896), 951-962.
NICE. (2009). Core Interventions in the Treatment and Management of Schizophrenia in Primary and Secondary Care (Update) (Clinical
Guideline 82). London: Author.


NICE. (2011). Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Panic Disorder, with and Without Agoraphobia. Management in Primary, Secondary and
Community Care (Clinical Guideline 113). London: Author.
Royal College of Psychiatrists. (2005). The ECT Handbook (Second Edition). The third report of the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Special
Committee on ECT (Council Report CR128). London: Royal College of Psychiatrists.
Shepherd, M., Watt, D., Falloon, I., & Smeeton, N. (1989). The natural history of schizophrenia: a five-year follow-up study of
outcome and prediction in a representative sample of schizophrenics. Psychological Medicine Monograph Supplement 15. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Sinyor, M., Schaffer, A., & Levitt, A. (2010). The sequenced treatment alternatives to relieve depression (STAR*D) trial: A review. The
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 55, 126-135.
Sullivan, J. T., Sykora, K., Schneiderman, J., Naranjo, C. A., & Sellers, E. M. (1989). Assessment of alcohol withdrawal: The revised Clinical
Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol scale (CIWA-Ar). British Journal of Addiction, 84, 1353-1357.
World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Geneva: Author.


Chapter 8 Intake interviews, testing and report writing
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-8
This chapter will offer guidelines for conducting intake assessments and report writing.
Intake interviews
With intake assessments the aim is to both establish a good working alliance with the client and to collect sufficient information to reach a
preliminary formulation of the main presenting problems. Careful planning can help the attainment of these two goals. To establish a good
working alliance with the client, plan to form a clear contract for assessment at the outset of the intake interview; to work collaboratively
with the client during the assessment; and to pace the interview, psychological testing, and other procedures to suit the client's readiness
and ability to engage fully with the assessment process. To collect sufficient information to draw up a preliminary formulation, plan to cover
specific lines of questioning in the intake interview concerning the main presenting problem and its past treatment, the client's personal
and family history. Detailed plans for these lines of questioning may be developed in light of the account of the client's problem given by
the referring agent in the referring letter or by phone. If you are working on a multidisciplinary team, consult with colleagues who have

had recent contact with the client and read past correspondence and reports available in hospital or agency records to help plan the intake
interview. Where clients are willing and able, invite them by post or in the waiting room to complete and return an intake questionnaire such
as that in Table 8.1 along with psychometric measures of depression, anxiety, relationship difficulties and so forth if appropriate. Plan your
intake interview using information from all of these sources along with available scientific and clinical information about the assessment
and treatment of the problems for which the client has been referred.
Contracting for assessment
The aim of contracting for assessment is to reach agreement with clients about completing an assessment, which will point to a treatment
or case management plan. When contracting for assessment, begin by asking clients what prompted them to look for help and how, in their
view, the referral was made. Sometimes clients are the main customers for psychological consultation. They want help with a problem and
this has led them to seek the referral for consultation. Here, contracting for assessment is straightforward. Explain what the assessment
entails and then proceed with the client's consent and agreement. Other times clients arrive at an intake assessment at the request of a family
member, friend, family doctor, probation officer, or another member of the multidisciplinary team. In these instances contracting for
assessment is more complex, because the referrer, not the client, is the main customer for consultation. In these instances, contracting for
assessment is particularly important, because failure to do so adequately may lead to the client withdrawing from the assessment before it
is over. In such instances clients may object to answering stressful questions or completing challenging psychological tests because they
view these procedures as being forced upon them rather than personally chosen. For these cases, once the client has explained their
understanding of the referral process, explain your understanding of how the referral was made, if this differs from that of the client. When
an agreed understanding of the referral route has been established, explain what the assessment involves. Outline the way in which the
interviews and testing procedures will be conducted, and the time commitment required. Clarify the limits of confidentiality. Normally, the
contents of sessions are confidential unless there is evidence that the client is a serious threat to themselves or to others. For example, where


there is evidence of suicidal intent or violence, confidentiality may be breached. In some instances it may be important to interview not only
the client but also members of the client's family to give collateral information to assist with diagnosis and formulation, or as part of
assessment for marital or family therapy. For convenience, all of these items are explained in the top box of the Intake Form given in Table
8.1. Devote some time to exploring the pros and cons of completing the assessment. The downside of an assessment is that it involves a
significant commitment and answering searching and potentially stressful questions. The benefits include reaching a clearer understanding
of one's difficulties and the possibility of identifying solutions to problems of living. Contracting for assessment is complete when clients
have been adequately informed about the process and have agreed to complete the assessment. Contracting for assessment within the
context of different approaches to psychotherapy is discussed in Chapters 3-5.
Table 8.1 Intake information form
Please read the information in this box and complete this for
Voluntary attendance. Our clinic offers help to people with s
relationships, your partner or other family members are wel
First appointments. Your first appointment will last about 2
ability or memory and to fill out some questionnaires.
Other appointments. At the end of the first appointment we
appointment so we can book in another person.
Confidentiality. In our clinic all staff work as part of team. Tl
psychologist is confidential to our team.
The only circumstances under which we are obliged to give i
We will not give information about your case to others witho
Anonymised case reports. As a routine part of psychologists
Psychological reports. If you would like a psychological repo
Please sign the next line to indicate that you consent to the
Signature
Please complete this form. The information you give here w
boxes blank. Otherwise write your answers in the boxes on t
Thank You.
1 Please put your name and address, telephone number and
2 What is your age?
3 What is your gender?
4 What is your date of birth?
5 Who is your family doctor and what is his phone number c
6 Please sign opposite if you give your consent for me to con
The following questions are about your current living situat

Intake interview schedule
Intake interviews should cover the following broad areas of enquiry:
• Current concerns and problems
• Problem and treatment history
• Developmental history
• Family history
• Current risk
• Multiagency involvement.
Current concerns and problems
Begin by enquiring about clients' main concerns and problems. Then ask for an account of the most recent episodes of each of the problems.
A description of a problem episode includes an account of what led up to the occurrence of the problem, what happened while the problem
was occurring and what happened afterwards. Problem episodes also include accounts of what the client was thinking, feeling, doing, and
how they were interacting with others. Questions about what the client was thinking will give information about belief systems, cognitions,
cognitive distortions, negative automatic thoughts, conflicts between impulses and injunctions, coping strategies and defence mechanisms.
Questions about what the client was feeling will give information about affect, emotions, impulses and physiological states. Questions
about what the client was doing will throw light on typical behaviour patterns. Questions about how the client was interacting with others
will give information about transactional patterns, stresses and supports entailed by particular relationships, and patterns of relationships
within the client's family, work setting and peer group or the way the client interacts with members of the health care system.

If clients reply to invitations to describe problem episodes by giving a general account of what usually happens, invite them to be more
specific and to describe for the last time the problem occurred the actual events that occurred in a step-by-step fashion. Ask clients to
describe problem episodes as if they were watching a film of the episode happening. Accounts of specific episodes allow us to form more
accurate understandings of presenting problems. If clients insist that their problems are chronic and constant rather than episodic, ask them
to recount episodes in which their problems deteriorated or improved even marginally on a scale from 1 to 10.
Problems and treatment history
To obtain a succinct history of the course of the client's problems over time and their response to treatment, ask about the nature, frequency
and intensity of the problems starting with the present and working backwards in time to the point where the problems started. Enquire
about previous successful and unsuccessful solutions to these problems and the impact of previous episodes of psychological, medical,
spiritual or other forms of treatment. Explore clients' views about the causes of these problems and possible solutions that they suspect may
be effective in future. In listening to replies to these enquiries and requesting elaboration about the social context within which the problems
have been occurring, particular attention should be paid to possible problem-maintaining processes, including the following:
• Problematic cognitive factors including belief systems, attributional styles and cognitive distortions.
• Inadvertent reinforcement of the problem or unsuccessful attempted solutions.
• The use of maladaptive coping strategies.
• The use of immature defence mechanisms.
• Involvement in problematic interaction patterns within the family, workplace, peer group or treatment system.
• The impact of physical and physiological factors including medication; seasonal mood changes; shift work; sleeping, eating and sexual
behaviour patterns; physical illness; and immune system functioning.


These factors, which are drawn from cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT), psychodynamic, systemic and biomedical traditions, have been
discussed in detail in Chapters 3-7. In tracing the history of the presenting problems, enquire about potential triggering or precipitating
factors that preceded the current and past episodes of the problem. Precipitating factors include major stressful life events; a build-up of
minor stressful life events; illnesses and injuries; lifecycle transitions; and major changes within the family, particularly the addition of
new family members (e.g. birth of a child or marriage) or loss of a family member (e.g. bereavement or leaving home). These factors have
been discussed in detail within the context of the lifecycle in Chapter 1 and with reference to constructing formulations associated with
diagnostic syndromes in Chapter 2.
Developmental history
To place the client's difficulties in context it is useful to establish a developmental history. Constructing a lifeline can be helpful in tracing
the sequence of significant events within a client's life. Using a large sheet of paper or a whiteboard, invite the client to collaboratively draw
a graphic linear representation of their life from the present back to their conception, identifying important milestones along the way. Begin
with the present. Then ask about significant normative events such as births, adoptions, fostering and deaths within the family; personal
and family illnesses, injuries and periods of psychological problems; marriage and separation; current occupation, changes in jobs and
periods of unemployment; entering the workforce; experiences in higher education, secondary schooling, and primary schooling; family-
of-origin experiences in childhood and adolescence; and early family life experiences. When these major markers are placed on the lifeline,
starting with the most recent section, fill in periods when the presenting problems were particularly pronounced and periods of remission.
Then fill in other significant life events working from the present to the past. Constructing a lifeline should be informed by the material
on the family and personal lifecycles covered in detail in Chapter 1. Lifeline construction affords opportunities for identifying predisposing
factors, such as early life adversities, that may have rendered clients vulnerable to developing their current difficulties. However this

procedure can also yield important information on protective factors and personal strengths. Predisposing and protective factors are
detailed in Chapter 2.
Family history
Clinical guidelines for constructing a genogram and taking a family history are given in Chapter 6. Enquiries about family membership,
structure and development should cover the following areas:
• Current household membership.
• Extended family membership.
• Other network members.
• Identifying information such as names, ages, occupations and locations of important family and network members.
• Major illnesses and psychosocial problems including hospitalisations, physical and psychological problems and criminality.
• Major protective factors and strengths of family members.
• The major transitions that the family has made through the family lifecycle.
• Current stage of the lifecycle.
• Supportive relationships.
• Stressful relationships.
• Family factions, triangulation patterns and multigenerational patterns.
In addition to this information about family membership and dynamics, the physical and social context of the client's family should also
be assessed. Ask if the client is homeless, which is an increasingly common problem among people with severe psychological problems. If the


client is not homeless, ask about the client's accommodation; its proximity to the client's employment and the extended family; the degree of
isolation or crowding in the client's home; the quality of living quarters; and problems with safety or hygiene. Where the client is homeless
or is having financial difficulties that may affect their access to accommodation, assess their needs and entitlement to benefits, in line with
local statutory procedures.
Current risk
In intake interviews it is a statutory duty to assess risk, that is, to determine if clients are a danger to themselves or to other people. The
following areas of risk deserve routine consideration:
• Suicide risk.
Risk to self due to impaired judgement associated with conditions such as psychosis or dementia.
• Risk to children through impaired parenting capacity, neglect or abuse.
• Risk of violence to others including domestic violence or violence to others in the community.
The assessment of suicide risk is described in detail in Chapter 11. The core issue is whether the client shows suicidal intentions (rather
than mere ideation), and whether there is a constellation of a significant number of risk factors and few protective factors that make it likely
that the client will act on suicidal intentions. Where this is the case, the immediate priority is suicide risk management, described in Chapter
11.
If clients are psychotic or suffering from dementia or some other psychological condition that significantly impairs their capacity to safely
care for themselves, then there is a statutory duty to inform the next of kin and arrange a care plan in collaboration with them. Working with


people who have psychotic disorders is discussed in Chapter 25 and problems of older adulthood including dementia are covered in Chapter
26.
If the client is a parent, then it is important to enquire about their capacity to fulfil this role. The key statutory issue is whether the client
along with other adults who collectively have responsibility for parenting the children are capable of doing so. Do they collectively have
the capacity to meet the children's needs for safety; care and nurturance; control and discipline; and age-appropriate responsibilities and
intellectual stimulation? To assess this, conduct a collateral interview with those adults who share responsibility for parenting the client's
children. Details of how to conduct this type of assessment are given in the Handbook of Child and Adolescent Clinical Psychology, Third Edition
(Carr, in press).
If the client is at risk of becoming violent towards other adults (such as a spouse, parent, friend, acquaintance or other person), clinicians
have a responsibility to inform the statutory authorities of the risk of violence. If the client is not detained by the statutory authorities, then
the clinician has a duty to inform the potential victim of the risk of violence. Assessment of risk of violence is covered in Chapter 12 on anger
management.
Coordination of multiagency input
When working with multiproblem clients who are involved with multiple agencies, clarify what other agencies are involved, the duration
of their involvement, the role that each of the agencies takes in offering services to the client, and the way that multiagency involvement
is coordinated. In complex cases with multiagency involvement, often there is limited coordination. Family doctors, psychiatrists, social
workers, addiction counsellors, probation officers and other professionals may all be offering services but in an ad-hoc manner. In such cases,
one of the most useful psychological interventions is to convene a multiagency meeting with the client and involved professionals, agree on
a broad case formulation, a case management plan based on the formulation, and the roles of involved professionals in executing this plan in
a coordinated way. Clinical guidelines for conducting such network meetings are given in Chapter 6.

Formulation and feedback
The assessment is complete when the presenting problem and related difficulties are clarified; related predisposing, precipitating,
maintaining and protective factors have been identified; a formulation has been constructed; possible goals have been identified; options for
case management or treatment have been identified; and these have been discussed with the family.
A formulation is a mini-theory that explains why the presenting problems developed, why they persist, and what protective factors either
prevent them from becoming worse or may be enlisted to solve the presenting problems. Formulations typically integrate information about
predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors. Predisposing factors are those biological or psychological features of the
client or negative aspects of the early parent-child relationship or family situation that have rendered the client vulnerable to developing
the presenting problems. Precipitating factors are those stressful life events that have led to the onset of the current concerns and problems.
Maintaining factors are those biological and psychological characteristics of the client along with patterns of interaction within the client's
social system that allow the problem to persist. Protective factors are those biological and psychological characteristics of the client
along with patterns of interaction within the client's social system which prevent problems from deteriorating and which have positive
implications for response to treatment and prognosis.
CBT, psychodynamic, systemic and biomedical formulation models accord specific significance to particular sets of predisposing,
precipitating, maintaining and protective factors. Generic CBT, psychodynamic and systemic formulation models are given in Chapters 3, 4
and 6. In Chapters 9-26 formulation models associated with specific problems are presented.
The importance of formulation cannot be overemphasised. It involves linking academic knowledge of theory and research to clinical
practice. If the working alliance is the engine that drives the therapeutic process, formulation is the map that provides guidance on what
direction to take.


Case management options
Case management options are derived from the formulation by judging what maintaining factors would have to change in order for the
problem to be resolved. Make this judgement on the basis of the literature on effective treatments of similar cases and clinical experience.
Most case management options, in order of increasing intensity, fall into the following categories:
• Refer the client back to the referring agent with advice on future management. Such advice may range from reassurance that there is no
significant psychological problem to guidance on implementing a psychological intervention programme.
• Offer psychoeducation and self-help (verbally, as bibliotherapy, or involving a computer-based intervention) and suggest periodic
reassessment.
• Refer to another professional within the psychologist's multidisciplinary team for consultation; for example, social work or physiotherapy.
• Refer to another professional or residential facility outside the multidisciplinary team.
• Offer focal and circumscribed psychological intervention to the client, such as the programmes described in much of this volume.
• Offer multimodal intervention in conjunction with other professionals.
A first step in deciding how to proceed beyond assessment is clarifying into which of these categories the case management plan falls.
Much of this volume offers guidance on case management plans that fall into the last two categories. A summary of the intake assessment
schedule described in this section is given in Table 8.2. As part of the case management process, it is important to be clear about your
own areas of competence and the limits or bounds of that competence. Psychologists are ethically bound to work within the limits of
their competence and to refer on to others where they do not possess the competencies necessary to meet the client's needs. With a view

to referring on, it is useful to gather information about human and service resources available, including skills and areas of expertise of
departmental and multidisciplinary colleagues, and local and regional services.
Table 8.2 Intake assessment
Problems and treatment history Nature, frequency and
intensity of the current problems Fluctuations on 10-point
scale in recent episodes of chronic problems Previous episodes
of disorders, precipitating and maintaining factors Previous
episodes of treatment and helpful aspects of treatment
Clients views of causes and solutions Role of cognitive factors
(belief systems, attributional styles and distortions) Role of
inadvertent reinforcement Role of coping strategies Role of
defence mechanisms Role of interaction patterns, chronic stress
and support Role of physical, physiological and medication
factors Role of stressful life events Role of lifecycle transitions
Developmental history Current marital situation and recent
changes Current work situation and recent changes Entering
the workforce/unemployment Experiences in higher education
Secondary schooling Primary schooling Family-of-origin
experiences in childhood and adolescence Early family life
experiences Family history Current household membership
Extended family and network membership Family illnesses,
psychosocial and criminal problems Family strengths Family
lifecycle transitions Supportive family relationships Stressful
Formulation: predisposing factors Genetic vulnerabilities Prenatal
and perinatal complications Early insults, injuries and illnesses
Low intelligence Difficult temperament Neuroticism and negative
personality traits Low self-esteem External locus of control
Separation from or loss of a parent Parental psychopathology
Insecure attachment to parents Family-of-origin disorganisation
Parental marital discord Physical and sexual abuse and neglect
Inadequate early social support network Poor premorbid adjustment
Formulation: precipitating factors Major stressful life events
Build-up of minor stresses Loss experiences Humiliation Illness
and injury Victimisation Redundancy Financial difficulties
Imprisonment Lifecycle transitions and changes Formulation:
maintaining factors Problematic belief systems Low self-efficacy
Problematic attributional style Cognitive distortions Inadvertent
reinforcement of problem behaviour Dysfunctional coping strategies
Immature defence mechanisms Problematic adult attachment
styles Problematic interaction patterns in marriage and family
Problematic interaction patterns in social network Problematic
interaction patterns in the treatment network High stress and low
support Dysregulation of neurotransmitter systems Formulation:

family relationships Family relationship patterns Current
accommodation or homelessness Multiagency input Current
treatment network membership Family doctor, hospital
physicians Psychiatrists Social workers Addiction counsellors
Probation officers Patterns of interaction with treatment network
Testing Broad measures Brief measures
Structured diagnostic interviews
Cognitive tests
Personality inventories
Projective tests
Current risk
Suicide risk
Risk to self due to impaired judgement (psychosis or dementia)
Risk to children (impaired parenting capacity, neglect or abuse)
Risk of violence (domestic violence or other)
protective factors Good health Good premorbid adjustment Average
or high intelligence Easy temperament in childhood No genetic
vulnerabilities Positive past response to medication History of coping
well with a similar problem Psychological-mindedness Extraversion
and emotional stability
Conscientiousness and agreeableness
High self-esteem
Internal locus of control
Strong self-efficacy beliefs
Optimistic attributional style
Functional coping strategies
Secure adult attachment style
Mature defence mechanisms
Capacity to maintain a therapeutic alliance
Positive interaction patterns in marriage and family
Positive interaction patterns in social network
Positive interaction patterns in the treatment network
Low stress and high support
Case management options
Refer back with no action
Psychoeducation periodic reassessment
Refer within team
Refer to outside team
Focal treatment
Multimodal treatment
Structured interviewing and psychological testing
Structured assessment instruments such as self-report inventories, clinician rating scales and ability tests may be included in intake

assessment procedures. When selecting structured instruments, key concerns are their reliability, validity, sensitivity to change and user-
friendliness. For self-report instruments, it is important that these have good internal consistency reliability, which shows that all of the
items in a scale intercorrelate well and tap into the same construct. Cronbach's alpha, which ranges from 0-1, is the most commonly
reported index of internal reliability, and values above .7 indicate good reliability. For rating scales completed by clinicians based on their
observations of clients' behaviour, it is important that there be evidence of good inter-rater reliability. Cohen's Kappa, which ranges from 0-1,
is a widely reported index of inter-rater reliability. Values above .7 indicate good inter-rater reliability. For self-report inventories and rating
scales, good test-retest reliability is also desirable. However, this has to be balanced against the instrument's sensitivity to change. In clinical
practice, it is good to use standardised instruments to evaluate symptoms before and after treatment to evaluate treatment effectiveness.
Only instruments that are sensitive to change are useful for this purpose.
Instruments with good concurrent criterion and predictive validity are clinically useful. Instruments with good criterion validity can
distinguish between known groups. For example, a valid self-report measure of depressed mood can distinguish between people with
depression, psychotic disorders and normal controls. Instruments with good predictive validity have been shown to forecast certain types of
clinically meaningful outcomes. For example, valid IQ tests partially predict educational and occupational success.
User-friendliness is an important concern, because clients are less motivated to complete instruments that are not user-friendly. User-
friendly assessment instruments do not put excessive demands on clients. Shorter instruments and instruments with items, questions or
tasks that are interesting and not objectionable tend to be more user-friendly.
Structured assessment instruments fall into the following categories:
• Broad measures of general symptoms
• Brief measures of symptoms and constructs
• Structured diagnostic interviews

• Cognitive functioning tests
• Personality inventories
• Projective tests.
Broad measures of general symptoms
Self-report inventories that cover a broad range of general symptoms are particularly useful where there is a need to screen for a
range of psychological problems. The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI-2; Butcher et al., 2001; Graham, 2011; Greene,
2010; Nichols & Kaufman, 2011), now in its second revision, and the Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI; Morey, 1991, 2003) fall
into this category. The MMPI contains 567 items and takes up to an hour to complete. It yields scores for the following main scales:
hypochondriasis, depression, hysteria, psychopathic deviance, paranoia, psychasthenia, schizophrenia, mania, masculinity-femininity and
social introversion. It also includes validity scales, and a variety of experimental scales have been developed using the MMPI item pool. In
the tradition of the MMPI, the Personality Assessment Inventory is one of the most important new instruments to be developed for assessing
a broad range of symptoms and concerns. The PAI is a 344-item inventory which yields scores on 11 clinical scales (somatic complaints,
anxiety, anxiety-related disorders, depression, mania, paranoia, schizophrenia, borderline features, antisocial features, alcohol problems and
drug problem), five treatment scales (aggression, suicidal ideation, stress, non-support and treatment rejection), two interpersonal scales
(dominance and warmth), and four validity scales (inconsistency, infrequency, positive impression and negative impression).
Briefer scales, which nevertheless aim to evaluate a broad range of symptoms, include the revised Symptom Checklist 90 (SCL-90-
R; Derogatis, 1994) and the General Health Questionnaire (GHQ; Goldberg & Williams, 1991). The SCL-90-R was developed in the US
and the GHQ was developed in the UK. The SCL-90-R, which contains 90 items, can be completed in 20 minutes. It yields scores for
somatisation, obsessive-compulsive symptoms, interpersonal sensitivity, depression, anxiety, hostility, phobic anxiety, paranoid ideation
and psychoticism. There is a parallel clinician-rated version of the SCL-90-R and briefer 53-item and 18-item self-report versions. There


are versions of the GHQ with 60, 30, 28 and 12 items, and all contain an overall cut-off score that allows clinicians to reliably distinguish
between people with problems severe enough to warrant diagnosis from those whose problems are in the normal range. Only the GHQ-28
yields subscale scores, and it does this for the following four dimensions: somatic symptoms, anxiety, social dysfunction and severe
depression.
Brief measures of symptoms and constructs
Where there are good reasons to believe that a client has a problem in a particular domain, then it is appropriate to use brief syndrome-
specific measures of a circumscribed set of symptoms, such as the Beck Anxiety (BAI; Beck & Steer, 1990) and Depression (BDI-II; Beck et al.,
1996) Inventories. The BAI and BDI-II may be used in cases where depression and anxiety are the symptoms of central concern. For many
psychological problems and for particular psychotherapeutic models such as CBT, psychodynamic and systemic models, brief measures of
important constructs related to specific problems or particular models are available. These include measures of attributional style, coping
strategies, defence mechanisms, stressful life events, social support, marital functioning, family functioning, quality of life and so forth.
Many of these measures are listed at the end of other chapters in this volume. Good compendiums of these measures have been published by
Fischer and Corcoran (2013) and Rush et al. (2008).
In addition to using brief problem-specific or model-specific measures, it is useful to routinely administer a brief general measure of
overall functioning to all clients in a service before and after treatment and at follow-up as part of service monitoring and quality assurance
practice. In the UK, the Clinical Outcomes in Routine Evaluation (CORE; CORE System Group, 1999) System and the Health of the Nation
Outcome Scales (HoNOS; Wing et al., 1996) are widely used for this purpose and are suitable for clients with a wide range of difficulties.
The CORE system contains a self-report 34-item CORE Outcome Measure, which yields scores for subjective well-being, problems and
symptoms, personal functioning and current risk to self or others. It also contains a therapy assessment form and end-of- therapy form
which allows clinicians to routinely record service quality data focusing on access, appropriateness, acceptability, equity, effectiveness and

efficiency. Other CORE instruments have been developed, including an ideograph Goal Attainment and Helpful Aspects of Therapy form.
This instrument allows clinicians to refine their therapeutic approach in light of client feedback.
The HoNOS contains 12 scales for rating cases with severe psychological problems. The scales are (1) overactive, aggressive, disruptive
or agitated behaviour; (2) non-accidental self-injury; (3) problem drinking or drug-taking; (4) cognitive problems; (5) physical illness or
disability problems; (6) problems with hallucinations and delusions; (7) problems with depressed mood; (8) other mental and behavioural
problems; (9) problems with relationships; (10) problems with activities of daily living; (11) problems with living conditions; and (12)
problems with occupation and activities. Each scale is scored from 0 = no problem to 4 = severe problem on the basis of all information
available during the 2 weeks preceding the rating. Versions of the HoNOS have been developed for adults, older adults, children and
adolescents; people with intellectual disabilities; people in forensic settings; and people with acquired brain injury.
Structured diagnostic interviews
Some of the best-developed structured diagnostic interviews are the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders-Clinician Version
(SCID-5-CV; First et al., 2016), the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID-II; First et al., 1997) and
the World Mental Health Composite International Diagnostic Interview (WMH-CIDI, WHO, 1998), which can be used to derive both DSM
and ICD diagnoses. In addition to these omnibus interview schedules covering many disorders, structured interviews have been developed
for specific groups of disorders such as Anxiety Disorder Interview Schedule for DSM IV (DiNardo et al., 1994). Other structured interviews
of relevance to specific types of psychological problems are listed at the end of other chapters in this volume. In Chapter 2 it was mentioned
that structured clinical interviews have been developed to improve the reliability of psychiatric diagnoses, especially in research studies.
Structured interviews are not widely used in routine clinical practice by clinical psychologists. This may be partly due to psychologists'
awareness of the shortcomings of the DSM and ICD classification systems outlined in Chapter 2. It may also be because structured interviews
are very time-consuming to administer and require a considerable amount of training and practice before they can be reliably used.


However, structured interviews can be useful for cases where lack of diagnostic precision may have an important bearing on appropriateness
of service provision and outcome.
Cognitive functioning tests
The assessment of general intelligence; verbal and non-verbal intelligence; memory; other cognitive abilities; and academic attainment is
necessary when there are reasons to suspect that clients have disabilities in these areas or where an evaluation of fluctuations in cognitive
functioning over time is required. Among the more common presentations requiring such assessment are intellectual disability, specific
learning disabilities, traumatic brain injury, cognitive deterioration following chronic drug and alcohol misuse, seizure disorders, dementia
and other neurological disorders. The assessment and management of intellectual disability is a specialist area, and clinical guidelines
for this area of practice are given in Carr et al. (in press). Specialist guidelines for neuropsychological assessment are given in Gurd et
al. (2010), Lezak et al. (2012) and Parsons and Hammeke (2014). For general practice in clinical psychology, guidelines for administering
and interpreting tests of cognitive functioning are given in Groth-Marnat (2009) and Dorfman and Hersen (2001). Specific guidelines on
the administration and interpretation of the third edition of Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS-IV; Wechsler, 2008, 2010), which is
the most widely used measure of adult intelligence, is given in Lichtenberger and Kaufman (2012). In the present volume, assessment of
cognitive functioning in older adults is considered in Chapter 26.
Personality tests
Trait theory assumes that cross-situational regularities in personal functioning may best be accounted for by a limited number of
dimensions or traits, and that these traits may be reliably and validly assessed by self-report inventories. Usually self-report personality
inventories include validity scales which allow the clinician to check that the degree to which respondents have been 'faking good', 'faking
bad' or responding randomly. Within the broad tradition of trait theory there has been considerable controversy over the precise number of

traits that may appropriately be used to describe personality functioning. At one extreme, Eysenck in the UK argued that three traits
(neuroticism, extraversion and psychoticism) could account for most aspects of personality functioning, and he then went on to identify the
physiological basis for each of the traits. These three traits may be measured by the Revised Eysenck Personality Inventory (EPI-R; Eysenck &
Eysenck, 1991). In contrast, Cattell in the US argued that 16 traits are required to account for significant areas of personality functioning.
These may be assessed using the 16 Personality Factor inventory, now in its fifth edition (16 PF-5; Cattell et al., 1994). Cattell has shown
through extensive research how the traits in his model are associated with work practices and relationship styles. Between these three- and
16-factor models, Costa and McCrae (1992) have proposed a five-factor model, with each of the five factors having six facets. The five factors
are neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, agreeableness and conscientiousness. The five factors and the six facets associated
with each of these may be assessed with the Revised NEO personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992). The five-factor model has
been used to profile the behaviour of people at work and in relationships over the lifespan and to profile people with personality disorders.
Differences in the number of traits in the three aforementioned models are due to differences in the factor analytic methods used and the
range of items analysed. The EPQ-R, the 16 PF-5 and the NEO-PI-R may all be used to evaluate personality functioning in clinical settings,
although these instruments are not widely or routinely used by clinical psychologists in the UK and Ireland. Unlike tests which assess the
broad symptoms or psychopathology, such as the MMPI-2 (Butcher et al., 2001) and PAI (Morey, 1991), and the Millon Clinical Multiaxial
Inventory-III (MCMI-III; Millon et al., 1997) which assesses self-reported personality disorders, trait-based personality inventories are value
neutral. Results from personality trait-based assessment inventories indicate clients' strengths and weaknesses. In contrast, results of
psychopathology-oriented scales such as the MMPI-2, PAI and MCMI-III highlight clients' deficits but do not appraise strengths.
Projective tests
With projective tests, cross-situational regularities in personal functioning are evaluated by observing and rating clients' responses to
relatively ambiguous stimuli presented in a standardised way. Projective testing rests on the assumption that important aspects of personal

functioning are revealed in situations where clients respond to relatively ambiguous stimuli. Clients project onto these ambiguous stimuli
unconscious habitual modes of functioning. Through validation studies, some evidence has been developed to show that certain patterns
of responding on projective tests are associated with certain intrapersonal and interpersonal styles of functioning. The Rorschach (Exner,
2000) and the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT; Murray, 1971) are among the best developed projective tests. With the TAT, the client is
shown a series of pictures and invited to tell stories about them, invented on the spur of the moment. The TAT assesses a variety of needs
including the needs for achievement, affiliation and autonomy. With the Rorschach, the stimuli are inkblots and clients comment on how
they perceive these. Useful introductory guides to the administration and interpretation of the Rorschach (Rose et al., 2000) and the TAT
(Teglasi, 2010) have been developed.
Report writing
Intake interviews and the results of psychological testing are usually written up as psychological reports and held on clients' clinical files.
Report writing is central to the practice of clinical psychology. The limitations of our memories require us to keep detailed accounts of
complex information about our clients. An accurate account of information gained in interviews, testing sessions and meetings with other
professionals is the basis on which a formulation is constructed and a treatment plan developed. Records also help us to keep track of
progress with case management plans. At the end of an episode of consultation, a summary of the episode provides information that may
be useful to ourselves or our colleagues in helping clients should they return for a further episode of consultation in the future. During the
process of assessment and case management, other members of the professional network such as colleagues from our team, family doctors,
referring agents and other involved professionals may require verbal or written reports. Clients and members of their family system may
also benefit from having written communication about aspects of the consultation process. In some cases it may be necessary to write
specialised reports as assignments for clinical psychology training programmes. On an annual basis it may be necessary to write a service
report. In this chapter guidelines for writing the following types of reports will be given:


• Progress notes
• Comprehensive assessment reports
• End-of-episode case summaries
• Verbal reports to clients and colleagues
• Correspondence with clients and colleagues
• Case study reports
• Annual service reports.

Psychologists have a duty to their clients to maintain confidentiality, and so all reports about clients should be written and managed
with this as a central guiding principle. In all circumstances where psychologists wish to exchange information with other members of the
client's professional or social network, the client's consent should be sought. Confidentiality may be broken only in circumstances where to
maintain confidentiality would place the client or some other person in danger. A guideline for all forms of reports is to always write in such
a way that you would be prepared to give your case files or service reports to clients and their families to read.

Progress notes
In making progress notes about clinical cases five categories of information should always be recorded. These are

• Time
• Attendance
• Review

• Agenda
• Plan.
The first letters of these category names form the acronym TARAP. The issues covered by each category will be expanded here.
Time
This category includes the date, day, time and duration of the session. It may be useful to also include the number of the session, particularly
if working within a time-limited contract for assessment or intervention. Often in clinical psychology, time-limited contracts of 6, 10 or 20
sessions are used.
Attendance
The people who attended the session and those who were invited and did not attend may be noted in this category. When the client does not
attend a session (referred to sometimes as a 'DNA') it is important to record what steps were taken to follow up with the client, particularly
where there are risks of self-harm.
Review
A review of significant events that may have occurred since the previous session are recorded here. Changes in the presenting problem and
factors related to its resolution or maintenance should be reviewed. Enquiries should also routinely be made about completion of assessment
tasks such as self-monitoring and treatment tasks. In the case of an initial session, changes that have occurred since the referral was made
may be noted.
Agenda
Information about the main content issues and the main processes that occurred may be recorded in this category. Content issues include the
topics discussed and the tests administered. Process issues include the quality of the working alliance and the impact of this on the progress

of assessment or treatment.
Plan
Future action for clients, network members and the psychologist may be noted in this category. These include assessment or treatment tasks
that clients have been invited to complete; assessment procedures or particular therapy-related themes for inclusion on the agenda for the
next session; and clinical hypotheses requiring further exploration.
The TARAP format for making progress notes is appropriate for assessment and treatment sessions with clients and members of their
social systems.
Comprehensive assessment report
A comprehensive assessment report is typically written at the end of the assessment stage. This report represents a summary of information
obtained throughout the assessment process, including sessions with the client and a review of reports from other professionals. From
an integration of this information, the proposed plan for case management is set out. The comprehensive assessment report is written
primarily for the psychologist and members of the psychologist's team. All other reports and correspondence are based on this document.
Usually it should include the section on the issues listed here.
Demographic information
The client's name, date of birth and address should be given here along with names, addresses and contact numbers for next of kin where
relevant.
Referral information
This section includes the referring agent's name, address and contact number, and the central problems that led to the referral or the
principal referral question. It is also useful to include here details of significant members of the professional network such as the names,


addresses and contact numbers of other involved professionals including the family doctor, psychiatrist, social worker, probation officer,
addiction counsellor, hostel manager and so forth.
Sources
The sources of information on which the report is based should be listed. These sources include all assessment sessions with dates and a note
of who attended the sessions. If previous reports by physicians, social workers or other professionals were used, these too should be noted.
History of the presenting problem and previous treatment
This section should include an account of how the problem developed and previous episodes of treatment. Note any factors that precipitated
episodes of the disorder and what was helpful in previous treatment episodes. The role of other involved professionals may be mentioned
here. If medical, psychiatric or social work reports are available, salient points from these may be summarised in this section.
Developmental history
Reference should be made to nature and timing of significant events or abnormalities in physical, cognitive and psychosocial development
over the course of the lifecycle. Note possible personal predisposing factors that may have rendered the client vulnerable to the current
disorder and any personal strengths that may act as protective factors.
The family history
Family membership, stresses and supports, relationship patterns, and significant achievements or difficulties in managing family
transitions over the lifecycle should all be mentioned in this section. Note possible social predisposing factors that may have rendered the
client vulnerable to their current disorder and any strengths in the client's social network that may act as protective factors.
Psychological testing
If psychological testing has been conducted, it is appropriate to include a section where reference may be made to the results of psychometric

assessments of presenting problems and cognitive abilities. In presenting psychological test results include the following information:
• The tests used;
• The number and duration of testing sessions;
• The impact of cooperation, medication, physical factors (noise, cold, crowding, etc.), extraneous psychosocial factors (e.g. exhaustion) on
the validity of the results;
• A list of results and an interpretation of these.
Present the results and their interpretation in a logical, orderly way. For example, divide the results into a subsection for tests of
psychosocial functioning (MMPI-2, SCL-90-R, BDI-II, BAI, etc.) and a subsection for results of cognitive tests (WAIS-IV). Where test results are
broadly within the normal range, keep the section on psychological testing brief.
Differential diagnosis and diagnosis
If there has been concern about the differential diagnosis, it is appropriate to include this section. State the main presenting problems,
the diagnostic possibilities that were considered and the diagnosis that is best supported by the data gathered during the psychological
assessment.
Formulation
A brief restatement of the central problems should be given here, along with an explanation of how they developed based on salient points
drawn from previous sections of the report. Reference should be made to predisposing, precipitating and maintaining factors. In addition,
protective factors that have a bearing on the prognosis should be mentioned. It is important to emphasise the client's strengths and
resources, as well as deficits and difficulties.


Recommended case management plan
A prioritised list of options for case management may be listed here. Taking no further action; periodic reassessment; referral to another
team member for consultation; referral elsewhere for consultation; focal psychological intervention; or multimodal intervention should
all be considered. Where a multimodal intervention programme is central to the management plan, details of the components of the
programme and the professionals responsible should be indicated. A key worker responsible for reviewing progress at designated times
should be specified.
Signature
Most agencies have a policy about signing reports. Unless there are ethical reasons for not doing so, follow this policy, particularly if you are
still in training. If there is no policy in your agency and you are in training, write your name and degrees on one line and underneath 'Clinical
Psychologist in Training' (in the UK) or 'Clinical Psychologist Intern', 'Extern' or 'Practicum Student' (in Canada and the US). In addition, the
supervisor's name, degrees and appointment are also placed on the report and co-signed.
Comprehensive assessment reports are usually written up by the key worker for the case. Useful guides to comprehensive psychological
report writing are Goldfinger and Pomerantz (2013) and Groth-Marnat and Davis (2014). Under some circumstances it may be useful to use
computer-aided systems for report writing. These are available for a variety of structured interviews, cognitive tests and personality tests.
End-of-episode case summary
When clients conclude an episode of treatment or case management, an end-of-episode case summary (or discharge summary) may be
written. This report summarises progress made as a result of implementing the case management plan. An end-of-episode case summary
should contain the following sections:
• The formulation

- The implementation of the case management plan
- The outcome.
The formulation outlined in the comprehensive assessment report may be restated in the first section of the end-of-episode case summary.
In the second section, a summary of the case management plan that was implemented should be given. It is also useful to note here any
cooperation or coordination difficulties that occurred and how various resistances within the client's network were managed. In cases that
did not respond to treatment, a hypothesis about the reasons for treatment failure should be given. If any new information came to light
that led to the original formulation being substantially revised, this should be noted. In the final section of an end-of-episode summary, the
degree to which specific treatment goals were met should be noted along with other positive or negative changes. Follow-up plans for review
sessions or relapse management should also be noted.
Verbal reports
During the consultation process it may be necessary to give verbal reports to clients and colleagues in feedback sessions, team meetings
and case conferences. In preparing verbal reports, first identify the audience to whom your report will be addressed. Is it a client, a social
worker, a physician, a psychiatrist or a mixed group of professionals? Then, clarify the kinds of questions they want answered. Do they want
to know if your assessment indicates a client has cognitive deficits, is at risk for suicide, or has responded to treatment? From your progress
notes or the comprehensive assessment report, abstract the points that you are confidently able to make to answer the question. If you are
unable to answer the question on the basis of the available information, arrange interviews or testing sessions to obtain such information if
this is feasible and within the remit of your professional role. Then prepare the list of points you wish to make in the meeting to answer the
questions you know or guess are of central concern to your audience. Frame the points in language and at a level of technical sophistication
that will be optimally intelligible to the audience. So, for example, it may be useful to give detailed psychometric information in a verbal

report to a neuropsychologist but of little use to give such information to a surgeon or occupational therapist. In some instances, you will be
unable to offer valid information to other professionals. For example, in some cases suicide risk is difficult to confidently assess, and in others
intelligence is difficult to assess because of cooperation problems. In such instances it is important to report that you are unable to answer
the questions posed.
When making a verbal report to any audience state:
• The question you aimed to answer;
• The source of your information and your confidence in its reliability and validity;
• The key pieces of information that answer the question (and no more).
If you are presenting information in a team meeting or case conference and do not know all of the participants, it is important to identify
yourself as a clinical psychologist (or a clinical psychologist in training working under the supervision of a senior staff member).
If information presented by other professionals in a team meeting or case conference is inconsistent with your findings, think through
the possible reasons for the discrepancy between the two sets of information before offering your opinion on this to the team or conference.
Discrepancies between professional reports are common. The important issue to resolve is why the discrepancy occurred, not which view
is correct and which is incorrect. Discrepancies may be due to the time and place where the assessment was conducted; the assessment or
treatment methods used; the informants; the level of cooperation between the client and the professional; and a wide range of other factors.
Correspondence with professionals
All correspondence should be written with the concerns of the recipient of the letter in mind. Before writing a letter, clarify what question
the recipient would like answered. Common questions are:

• Has the client been placed on the waiting list or have they been assessed?
• Why is the client behaving in an unusual way and what can be done about it?
• Have you been able to help the client manage the problem?
• Should we be coordinating our input to this case?
Decide what precise pieces of information the recipient would like abstracted from your case file to answer their question. Judge the
level of detail and degree of technical sophistication needed. Account should be taken of their knowledge of developmental psychology,
psychometrics, psychotherapy and so forth. If any action will be required on their part in response to your letter, decide exactly what it is
that you are suggesting they do to help the client.
Routinely in most public service agencies, letters are written to referrers following the receipt of a referral to indicate that the referral has
been placed on a waiting list. Letters are also written following a period of assessment to indicate the way the case has been formulated and
the recommended case management plan. Finally, letters are also written at the end of an episode of contact to inform the referrer of the
outcome of any intervention programme.
After having talked with more than 1,000 professional recipients of psychologists' reports on both sides of the Atlantic over the past 35
years, we can draw one reasonably valid conclusion. Clinical psychologists' reports are perceived by the referrer to be too long, and often the
key information required by the referrer is buried under a mountain of detail, deemed by the referrer to be unnecessary.
When a referral is received, it is sufficient to return a single-sentence letter indicating that the case will be placed on a waiting list and
seen within a specified time frame. Following a preliminary interview or series of assessment sessions, it is sufficient to write a brief letter
specifying the referral question, the assessment methods used, the formulation and the case management plan. A common mistake is to
send referrers (particularly family doctors) unwanted comprehensive assessment reports. It may be useful to conclude letters summarising

preliminary assessments by noting that a comprehensive report is available on request. In closing letters to referrers, it is sufficient to restate
the initial question, the formulation, the case management plan, the degree to which it was implemented and the outcome. The text from an
end-of-episode case summary may be used as the basis for writing a closing note to a referrer.
Asking other professionals to follow a particular course of action in a letter is more likely to lead to confusion than to coordinated action.
It is better practice to outline your formulation in a letter and invite other professionals to join you in a meeting to discuss joint action than
to ask them to implement a programme you have already designed.
Correspondence with clients
Letters may be used to help clients remember what was said during a consultation and to highlight key aspects of sessions. Case
formulations, test results and instructions for completing specific tasks may all be given in written form.
When writing a letter to a client, first clarify what you want to achieve by writing the letter. Do you want to inform the client or invite
them to behave differently? Ideally, what impact would you like the letter to have on the client? Second, guess what is on the client's mind
and how the client will be likely to respond to the information or invitation that you offer. In some instances clients will be likely to receive
information positively and respond to invitations to change their behaviour quite flexibly. In other situations, client's ability level, their
fear or anger that they are being negatively labelled by the psychologist, or their belief that the invitation in the letter to view the problem
differently or behave differently will lead to some negative outcome may prevent them from understanding information or following
through on invitations. The third step in writing letters to clients is to decide how information or invitations should be framed so that they
have the desired impact. Where clients have limited verbal or intellectual abilities, use simple language. Where, there is a danger that clients
may feel blamed for failing to solve the problem, acknowledge clients' strengths and commitment to change. Where clients fear that looking
at the problem differently or behaving differently will lead to negative outcomes, highlight the benefits of accepting the invitation but also
the dangers of accepting the invitation without due consideration and deliberation.

Where you wish to inform clients about appropriate self-help materials, it may be helpful to consult Norcross et al.'s (2013) authoritative
guide listed at the end of this chapter, and the recommended reading for clients at the ends of other chapters in this book.
Case study reports
In many clinical psychology training programmes conceptual clinical skills are assessed by case study. Case studies are an opportunity
for candidates to demonstrate that they can bring their knowledge of relevant psychological literature to bear on the way in which they
conceptualise and manage clinical problems. The precise requirements for writing a case study report vary from one clinical psychology
training programme to another. The guidelines presented here are those used in our doctoral programme in clinical psychology at University
College Dublin.
Case studies should be based on clients with whom the candidate has had clinical involvement as the key worker or as a co-worker
with another clinician. The scientist-practitioner model should be used; scientific knowledge and systematic investigative and intervention
methods must be brought to bear on a specific clinical problem in an interpersonally sensitive way. A knowledge of the relevant literature
must be demonstrated. A case study should highlight the candidate's ability to formulate and test clinical hypotheses. The ability to
synthesise salient points from a range of investigative procedures into a comprehensive formulation should be clearly shown. A case study
should indicate that the candidate can develop and implement treatment programmes and case management plans which follow logically
from case formulations. Interpersonal sensitivity and an awareness of process and ethical issues should also be demonstrated in case study
reports.
A case study may focus on describing how assessment procedures were used to resolve a diagnostic issue and arrive at a coherent
integrative formulation. In other instances, case studies may show how assessment and formulation led to the development and
implementation of a case management or treatment plan. Where candidates had primary responsibility for implementing one aspect of
this plan, particular attention may be paid to that in the case report. Where clients with similar problems have received group treatment,

an entire group may serve as the focus for the case study. In such instances, a generic formulation of the problem addressed by the group
treatment programme may be presented.
A case study may follow the outline structure presented in Table 8.3 and adhere to a specified work limit, for example 4,000 words
excluding appendices and references. Copies of reports, correspondence, and test forms may be included in appendices. Clients' names
and other identifying information should be deleted from these documents to preserve confidentiality. Consent for case studies should
be obtained at the outset. This issue is covered in the intake form in Table 8.1. Where the case study format given in Table 8.3 is clearly
unsuitable, candidates may order and organise case material and relevant information from the literature in a way that is most coherent.
While psychologists in clinical training usually choose to write up cases where the work proceeded smoothly in accordance with a treatment
manual, the client improved and was satisfied with services received, it may be more useful to write up work that is more representative of
routine practice. Indeed, the purpose of the case study is to demonstrate learning, reflection and professional development, and it is often in
difficult work with clients where things do not go smoothly, where clients are challenging or do not improve that we learn most. Such case
studies may provide excellent opportunities for reflection and development.
Service reports
On an annual basis, it is useful for clinical psychology service departments to produce reports that describe their performance over the
preceding 12-month period. Such reports are useful for service planning and for keeping managers, service purchasers and funders abreast
of departmental performance. Most psychology departments provide consultative and research services to colleagues as well as clinical
services to clients. It is therefore important to include sections on both of these in annual reports. However, here the focus will be on
producing that section of the annual report concerned with services to clients. Give a description of the types of services offered, the staff
who offer these, the target population for whom the service is intended and the avenues of referral. Then give a short statistical summary of
the number and type of cases that received consultation, with a breakdown of the way they were referred; their demographic characteristics;

their main diagnoses or presenting problems; and the amount of input made to cases in terms of the numbers of hours of clinical contact
and the number of hours of administrative time. These data may be routinely recorded for each case using a simple database. It is useful
also in annual reports to include data on the response of cases to treatment with reference to their scores on measures such as the CORE
(CORE System Group, 1999) or HONOS (Wing et al., 1996) that may be routinely administered before and after treatment. Mean scores
before and after treatment for all cases or for subgroups of cases may given. In addition, the number of cases that showed improvement on
these measures may be tabulated. It is also valuable to include information on service users' perspectives as given for example by the Client
Satisfaction with Treatment Scale (Larsen et al., 1979).
Electronic health records and regular outcome assessment
Increasingly, in many agencies where clinical psychologists are employed electronic health records are being used as an alternative to paper
case files (British Psychological Society, 2011). Important concerns for clients and clinical psychologists are the precise types of information
that are to be routinely uploaded to electronic health records and the range of professionals who may have access to this specialist
information. For example, in some services where electronic health records have been introduced, psychologists keep an additional private
paper file containing progress or process notes, psychological testing forms, genograms, informal correspondence with clients and so
forth. Periodically this information is summarised and entered into the electronic health record, and all professionals on the psychologist's
multidisciplinary team have access to this summary information. In other services all psychology notes, test forms and other information
is scanned or typed directly into the electronic health record, but access to this is limited to the psychologist only, with formal summary
reports or letters being sent to colleagues from other disciples periodically. It is important for clinical psychologists, especially those in
training, to be aware of their agency's policies on these issues, and where appropriate to contribute to policy development.
Table 8.3 Framework for writing a case study

1. 1 Demographic information about the case and the referral process
• Demographic information
• Referral agent, instigator of the referral and reason for referral
• History of the presenting problem
• Relevant background individual and family psychosocial and medical history
• Previous and current assessment and treatment
2. 2 Review of relevant literature
• Classification, epidemiology, clinical features, course, assessment, treatment and controversial issues
• Reference to ICD and DSM and other relevant classification systems
• Reference to major clinical texts and recent relevant literature (particularly review papers, book chapters, assessment manuals,
treatment manuals and handbooks)
3. 3 Preliminary hypotheses and preliminary formulation of problem
• Hypotheses and proposed plan for testing hypotheses
• Preliminary formulation of the problem from a theoretical perspective
4. 4 Assessment
• Procedures used (e.g. interviews, psychometric tests, observation sessions)
• Rationale for choice
• Developmental history with particular reference to salient features
• Family history and genogram with particular reference to salient features


• Current cognitive functioning (including a table of test results if cognitive tests were conducted)
• Current psychosocial adjustment (including results of behaviour checklists and personality tests)
5. 5 Formulation
• Implications of data from assessment for preliminary formulation and hypotheses
• Integration of assessment data into a comprehensive formulation highlighting predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and
protective factors or other relevant CBT, psychodynamic, systemic or biomedical formulation model
6. 6 Case management
• Consider options for action in the light of formulation (taking no further action, periodic reassessment, referral to another team
member for consultation, referral elsewhere for consultation, focal intervention or multimodal intervention)
• Choice of option and reason for choice in light of formulation
• Description of programme plan and goals of programme
• Review of progress in the light of goals
• Evaluation of outcome specifying assessment instruments used (graph changes in problems or symptoms if appropriate; at a
minimum pre-treatment and post-treatment measures may be used; single-case designs may be used if appropriate)
7.7 Process issues
• Impact of clinician-client relationship factors on the consultation process
• Impact of interprofessional and interagency relationships on the consultation process
8. 8 Ethical issues Ethical issues and the way they were managed should be addressed. Common issues include:
• The ability to give informed consent
• Confidentiality of reports
• Risk assessment (suicide, violence, impaired judgement, fitness to parent)


• Right of attorney
9. 9 Summary and conclusions
• Reason for referral
• Summary of assessment and formulation
• Summary of treatment
• Recommendation for future management
10. 10 References and appendices
• About 10 references, most of which should be to key review articles, book chapters, manuals, and handbooks should be included as references and these should be in APA referencing style (American Psychological Association, 2010).
• All relevant test result forms, checklists, reports from other professionals, correspondence, client drawings, etc. should be included as appendices with identifying information deleted.
A movement towards the periodic collection of standardised outcome data on all cases is accompanying the increasingly widespread uses of electronic health records. That is, in more and more agencies psychologists are being required as a routine part of their practice with all cases to use brief standardised measures to assess progress periodically. Outcome data may be collected using paper-and-pencil forms, and then entered into a computer for analysis. Alternatively clients may complete forms online using a digital interface. These digital interfaces may or may not form part of patients' electronic health records. Clearly there are efficiencies associated with both systems being closely linked. Periodically anonymised outcome data may be analysed to provide information on service outcomes such as improvement rates within the service as a whole. A summary of these analyses may be included in annual psychology service audits.


Summary
With intake assessments, the aim is to both establish a good working alliance with the client and to collect sufficient information to
reach a preliminary formulation of the main presenting problems. Intake interviews should cover the main presenting problem and its
past treatment, the client's personal and family history, risk assessment and multiagency involvement. In certain circumstances it is
useful to incorporate structured assessment instruments into the intake evaluation process. Such instruments include broad measures of
general symptoms, brief measures of specific sets of symptoms, structured diagnostic interviews, tests of cognitive functioning, personality
inventories and projective tests. In light of case formulations based on information from tests and intake interviews, case management
plans are developed. These plans fall into the following categories: taking no further action; periodic reassessment, referral to another team
member for consultation, referral elsewhere for consultation, focal intervention or multimodal intervention. Intake interviews, test results,
formulations and case management plans are usually written up as comprehensive assessment reports and held on clients' clinical files. In
routine progress notes, five categories of information may be recorded at the end of each session: Time, Attendance, Review, Agenda, and
Plan (TARAP). Throughout case management, progress notes may be recorded following the TARAP system and at the end of a treatment
episode, a case summary may be written containing the formulation, a summary of how the plan was implemented and the outcome to
which it led.
During the consultation process and when closing a case at the end of an episode it may be necessary to keep clients and colleagues
informed of progress through verbal or written reports. In preparing such reports or letters, first identify the audience to whom your report
will be addressed. Clarify what sort of questions they have. Compose the list of points you wish to make to answer these enquiries. Frame the
points in language and at a level of technical sophistication that will be optimally intelligible to the audience.

In clinical psychology training programmes, case study reports are used to assess conceptual clinical skills. In this chapter, a framework
for such reports was outlined. It follows the format of a comprehensive assessment report followed by an end-of-episode summary report,
and incorporates a brief literature summary, an explicit preliminary formulation and a section in which process and ethical issues are
considered.
To aid service development and provide service funders with accurate information on performance, clinical psychologists may produce
annual service reports. Such reports should include a statistical summary of the number and type of cases treated, with a breakdown of the
way they were referred, demographic characteristics, diagnoses or presenting problems, amount of input made to cases, response of cases to
treatment with reference to scores on psychometric outcome measures, and information on client satisfaction with services provided.
Exercise
Working in pairs, role-play all or part of intake interview in which one person takes the role of a client with a circumscribed clinical problem.
The interviewer should follow the guide in Table 8.2. After the interview write as brief a comprehensive report as possible and an even
briefer letter to the referring family doctor indicating the initial formulation and treatment plan.
Further reading for practitioners
Dorfman, W., & Hersen, M. (2001). Understanding Psychological Assessment: Perspectives on Individual Differences. New York: Kluwer
Academic-Plenum.
Fischer, J., & Corcoran, K. (2013). Measures for Clinical Practice and Research: A Sourcebook (Fifth Edition, Volumes 1 and 2). New York:
Oxford University Press.


Goldfinger, K., & Pomerantz, A. (2013). Psychological Assessment and Report Writing (Second Edition). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Groth-Marnat, G. (2009). Handbook of Psychological Assessment (Fifth Edition). New York: Wiley.
Groth-Marnat, G., & Davis, A. (2014). Psychological Report Writing Assistant. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. (Includes report writing software.)
Rush, J., First, M., & Blacker, D. (2008). Handbook of Psychiatric Measures (Second Edition). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing.

Further reading for clients

Norcross, J., Campbell, L., Grohol, J., Santrock, J., Selagea, F., & Sommer, R. (2013). Self Help That Works. Resources to Improve Emotional
Health and Strengthen Relationships (Fourth Edition). New York: Oxford University Press.

References

American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association. Washington, DC: Author.
Beck, A., & Steer, R. (1990). Beck Anxiety Inventory. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A., Steer, R., & Brown, G. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory—Second Edition (BDI-II). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
British Psychological Society. (2011). Guidelines on the Use of Electronic Health Records. Leicester, UK: Author.
Butcher, J. N., Graham, J. R., Ben-Porath, Y. S., Teilegen, Y. S., Dahlstrom, W. G., & Kaemmer, B. (2001). Minnesota Multi-phasic Personality
Inventory-2: Manual for Administration and Scoring (Revised Edition). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Carr, A. (in press). Handbook of Child and Adolescent Clinical Psychology: A Contextual Approach (Third Edition). London: Routledge.


Carr, A., Linehan, C., O'Reilly, G., Walsh, P., & McEvoy, J. (in press). Handbook of Intellectual Disability and Clinical Psychology Practice
(Second Edition). London: Routledge.
Cattell, R., Cattell, K., & Cattell, H. (1994). Sixteen Personality Factor—Fifth Edition (16PF 5). Champaign, IL: IPAT.
CORE System Group. (1999). CORE System User Manual. Leeds, UK: CSG. http://www.coreims.co.uk/downloads_forms.aspx
Costa, P., & McCrae, R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) Professional Manual.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Derogatis, L. (1994). Symptom Checklist-90 Revised (SCL-90-R) and Brief Symptom Inventory Manual. Minneapolis, MN: National
Computer.
DiNardo, P., Brown, T., & Barlow, D. (1994). Anxiety Disorder Interview Schedule for DSM IV. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Dorfman, W. I., & Hersen, M. (Eds.). (2001). Understanding Psychological Assessment: Perspectives on Individual Differences. New York:
Kluwer Academic-Plenum.
Exner, J. (2000). Rorschach Workbook for the Comprehensive System (Fifth Edition). Asheville, NC: Rorschach Workshop.
Eysenck, H., & Eysenck, S. (1991). Manual of the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire—Revised. Sevenoaks, Kent, UK: Hodder & Stoughton.
First, M., Spitzer, R., Gibbon, R., & Williams, J., & Benjamin, L. (1997). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis II Personality
Disorders (SCID-II). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. www.appi.org
First, M., Williams, J., Karg, R., & Spitzer, R. (2016). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders (SCID-5-CV) Clinician Version.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press.
Fischer, J., & Corcoran, K. (2013). Measures for Clinical Practice and Research: A Sourcebook (Fifth Edition, Volumes 1 and 2). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Goldberg, D., & Williams, P. (1991). Users Guide to the General Health Questionnaire. Windsor: NFER Nelson.
Goldfinger, K., & Pomerantz, A. (2013). Psychological Assessment and Report Writing (Second Edition). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.


Graham, J. (2011). MMPI-2: Assessing Personality and Psychopathology (Fifth Edition). New York: Oxford University Press.
Greene, R. (2010). MMPI-2/MMPI-2 RF Interpretive Manual (Third Edition). New York: Pearson.
Groth-Marnat, G. (2009). Handbook of Psychological Assessment (Fifth Edition). New York: Wiley.
Groth-Marnat, G., & Davis, A. (2014). Psychological Report Writing Assistant. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gurd, J., Kischka, U., & Marshall, J. (2010). Handbook of Clinical Neuropsychology (Second Edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larsen, D., Attkinson, C., Hargreaves, W., & Nguyen, T. (1979). Assessment of client/patient satisfaction: Development of a general scale.
Evaluation and Programme Planning, 2, 197-207.
Lezak, M., Howieson, D., Bigler, E., & Tranel, D. (2012). Neuropsychological Assessment (Fifth Edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lichtenberger, E., & Kaufman, A. (2012). Essentials of WAIS-IV Assessment (Second Edition). New York: Wiley.
Millon, T., Davis, R., & Millor, C. (1997). Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory-III (MCMI-III) (Second Edition). Minneapolis MN: National
Computer Systems.
Morey, L. (1991). Personality Assessment Inventory. Odessa, FL: PAR.
Morey, L. (2003). Essentials of PAI Assessment. New York: Wiley.
Murray, H. A. (1971). Thematic Apperception Test: Manual. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nichols, D., & Kaufman, A. (2011). Essentials of MMPI-2 Assessment (Second Edition). New York: Wiley.
Norcross, J., Campbell, L., Grohol, J., Santrock, J., Selagea, F., & Sommer, R. (2013). Self Help That Works. Resources to Improve Emotional
Health and Strengthen Relationships (Fourth Edition). New York: Oxford University Press.
Parsons, M., & Hammeke, T. (2014). Clinical Neuropsychology: A Pocket Handbook for Assessment (Third Edition). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Rose, T., Maloney, M., & Kaser-Boyd, N. (2000). Essentials of Rorschach® Assessment. New York: Wiley.


Rush, J., First, M., & Blacker, D. (2008). Handbook of Psychiatric Measures (Second Edition). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing.
Teglasi, H. (2010). Essentials of TAT and Other Storytelling Techniques Assessment (Second Edition). New York: Wiley.
Wechsler, D. (2008). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale—Third Edition (WAIS-IV). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Wechsler, D. (2010). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale—Third Edition (WAIS-IV-UK). Oxford, UK: Pearson.
Wing, J. K., Curtis, R. H., & Beevor, A. S. (1996). HoNOS: Health of the Nation Outcome Scales: Report on Research and Development July 1993–
December 1995. London: Royal College of Psychiatrists. http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/clinicalservicestandards/honos.aspx
World Health Organization. (1998). World Mental Health Composite International Diagnostic Interview (WMH-CIDI). Geneva: Author.
http://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/wmhcidi/about.php


Section 2 Mood disorders

Chapter 9 Depression
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-9
Case example
Ruth, aged 42, was referred for treatment of chronic depression. She presented with low mood, diurnal variation in mood, inability to
experience pleasure in activities that previously she would have found pleasurable, pessimistic thoughts about the self, the world and the
future, excessive guilt about not achieving high standards in all areas or her life, occasional suicidal ideation, loss of concentration and
poor memory, loss of energy, loss of libido, early morning waking, hyperphagia involving bingeing on chocolate, and restricted physical and
social activity. This pattern of symptoms had been present for a couple of months before her first consultation at our clinic. In the preceding
20 years she had had almost annual depressive episodes, although these were not seasonal. The episodes lasted between 1 and 3 months.
Between episodes she usually had incomplete remission of symptoms. Her energy, libido, concentration, and activity levels would return
to near normal levels, but she would continue to feel low mood and continue to experience excessive guilt and hold a pessimistic view of
the self, the world and the future, although not as extreme as during the depressive episodes. Her early episodes of depression had been

precipitated by clearly identifiable and highly significant stressful life events, such as anticipating her final physiotherapy exams, receiving
a promotion, and the birth of her children. However, later episodes seemed to be precipitated by far less significant events, such as minor
disappointments and the routine hassles of everyday life. Ruth may have been genetically vulnerable to depression. There was a history of
mood disorders in the families of both her parents. Her mother and father suffered from depression, as did two aunts on the mother's side
and an uncle on the father's side. Ruth may also have been psychologically vulnerable to depression. In childhood she had suffered a number
of significant losses and had been exposed to chronic intense, violent conflict with her brother. Also, when Ruth was 8, her older sister died.
This was a very significant loss because this sister had taken on the role of Ruth's carer when her mother suffered from two episodes of post-
natal depression after the birth of Ruth's two younger siblings.
In her childhood Ruth had been a quiet, withdrawn youngster but capable of making and maintaining friendships and of achieving well
at school. She found the transition to adolescence difficult and coped with this by bingeing on chocolate, a habit that led to her becoming
overweight. She periodically dieted and achieved a normal weight for her height, but weight control became an important difficulty in
her life. She graduated from secondary school in the top 5% of her class and gained admission to a highly competitive university-based
physiotherapy programme. She was an outstanding student, doing well both academically and clinically, but was overwhelmed by the stress
of sitting her final exams and was hospitalised for depression at 22 years of age. She was unresponsive to tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), and was given electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). She recovered from this first episode of depression
over a period of 4 months and went on to complete her final exams at 23 years of age.
Throughout her physiotherapy training her relationship with a boyfriend she had met in her teens deepened and she married him in her
mid-20s. He had qualified as an architect, and after a brief period working as a junior partner, he left and set up his own practice. David
was the same age as Ruth, but unlike her, he was an emotionally light-hearted, gregarious, extraverted person. Over the second half of their
twenties and during their early thirties the couple had four children, with the births spaced about 2 years apart. The children were healthy
and well adjusted. However, Ruth suffered from post-natal depression after each of the births. After the birth of the first child, Ruth gave up

her job and never again returned to practise in the public health service as a physiotherapist, although she did on two occasions do periods of
part-time private practice. Both of these periods of work were followed by episodes of depression.
Over the 20-year period from her first episode of depression, Ruth actively engaged in treatment about once every 2-3 years. However,
after her failure to respond to TCAs and MAOIs and her concerns about the side effects of ECT, she refused to consider other pharmacological
treatment options. Rather, she had attended a series of psychotherapists, psychologists and psychiatrists and had participated in both
individual and group-oriented client-centred and cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) programmes. She found that psychotherapy helped her
to recover from depression, but had little effect on residual symptoms she experienced between episodes, or on preventing relapse. She also
found that each time she disengaged from therapy she stopped doing the activities and using the coping strategies recommended by the
psychotherapists and so she would ultimately relapse.
A preliminary assessment in April 2000 at our clinic led to a syndromal formulation of her disorder, of the type given in the first
paragraph. That is, her current episode had been precipitated by a build-up of minor stressful life events. Her current vulnerability to
depression stemmed from her experience of multiple previous episodes and from both genetic and early childhood factors. Her low mood;
pessimistic, perfectionist and guilt-oriented thinking style; constricted lifestyle; and the physiological dysregulation evidenced by her
abnormal patterns of sleep, eating and sexual activity were mutually reinforcing and this maintained her depression. On the positive side
there were a number of protective factors in this case. Ruth was very intelligent, she had the capacity to make and maintain friendships, she
had a good marriage, good relationships with her four children and had shown in the past that she could use psychotherapy to recover from
depression.
On the basis of this formulation Ruth was offered a contract for 10 individual CBT sessions spaced at weekly or fortnightly intervals,
which she accepted. In the first four sessions the focus was on monitoring changes in mood and increasing activity levels. Through these
interventions Ruth became aware again that engagement in physical and social activities improved her mood, a lesson she had learned in
previous episodes of therapy. The pros and cons of Ruth taking selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) were discussed, but Ruth

decided against medication because she thought that this would be an admission that she was powerless to control her own mood. The next
four sessions focused on using a daily thought record and learning to 'catch' and challenge negative automatic thoughts and re-evaluate
depressogenic assumptions. In August, before the final two scheduled sessions were convened, therapy ceased due to conflicting holiday
arrangements and extra-therapeutic commitments. The plan had been to use these sessions to focused on relapse management.
In late October 2000, Ruth returned for a further episode of therapy. She described how her mood had deteriorated in the preceding 2
months and this was associated with a reduction in her activity levels, and a return to a pessimistic and perfectionist guilt-oriented thinking
style. However, prior to returning to therapy, Ruth, after much soul-searching decided to begin a course of pharmacological treatment and
arranged for her family doctor to prescribe her SSRIs. It became clear during this interview in October 2000 that Ruth's relapse was in part
due to the way she cut herself off from her partner when her mood dropped. Three-column formulations of problematic situations where
Ruth's interaction with her partner, David, maintained her low mood and exceptional circumstances in which this was expected to occur but
did not were drawn up. These are given in Figures 9.1 and 9.2. The second episode of treatment with Ruth involved both CBT and a systemic
approach. Ruth and David were invited to 10 conjoint sessions. In the initial session a rationale for couple treatment was offered, since this
was new to both of them. Through revisiting formulations of problem and exceptional episodes (given in Figures 9.1 and 9.2) it became clear
to the couple that jointly they had a better chance of defeating depression than leaving Ruth to fight the battle with depression alone. The
importance of social support, the value of planning conjoint physical and social activity and the value of jointly challenging pessimistic and
perfectionist styles of thinking were all emphasised in this rationale. Throughout couple therapy, depression (including depressive thinking
and all other aspects of the condition) was externalised as a problem the couple had to jointly address.
The psychoeducational material in Box 9.1 was verbally presented to the couple over the course of the first three couple therapy sessions
and revisited from time to time throughout the therapy. In these three sessions the couple were also invited to plan and complete conjoint
mood monitoring and activity-scheduling exercises. They developed a good routine for daily exercise together, weekly joint social outings,

and mood monitoring, which had an important impact on Ruth's mood. In addition, SSRIs began to take effect. Enactments of support giving
and communication skills training were also gradually introduced during the first three sessions.
Contexts
Belief systems
Behaviour pattern
Ruth has a genetic and
psychosocial vulnerability
to depression and a history
of multiple previous
episodes
Ruth believes that she cannot
control her mood, the pain in
her stomach, or her ability to
speak to Dave
Ruth wakes with a very low
mood, a pain in the pit of
her stomach, and is unable
to talk to Dave about it
In Dave's family of origin he
learned that good men are
able to support and cheer
up their wives
Dave believes that he has only
limited power to cheer Ruth up
when she is low and this makes
him doubt his value as a
partner
Dave tries to support Ruth
but when she doesn't
speak he withdraws feeling
disappointed and confused
Ruth has had multiple episodes
of depression in which she has
repeatedly disappointed Dave
and in which he has been
unable to cheer her up
Ruth believes she has
disappointed Dave again and will
probably do so repeatedly in the
future, and that he is unable to
support her
Ruth withdraws from Dave
and feels worse, but not as
bad as she would if she had
to continue to listen to him
trying to cheer her up

Figure 9.1 Three-column formulation of episodes that strengthen depression
Contexts
Belief systems
Behaviour pattern
Dave has sometimes
offered Ruth support when
she was depressed
Ruth believes that sometimes
she can ask Dave for support
Ruth wakes with a very low
mood, a pain in the pit of
her stomach, and tells
Dave she is having a blue
morning
In Dave's family of origin he
learned that good men are
able to support and cheer up
their wives
Dave is not under work stress
Dave believes that sometimes
he can support Ruth,
especially when he is not
under stress at work
Dave says he understands,
stays in kitchen drinking tea
with her and listening to the
radio, and does not try to cheer
her up or rush off to work
Ruth and Dave have a good
marriage in which Dave has
shown that he is committed to
Ruth and wants to support her
through thick and thin
Ruth believes Dave understands
how difficult it is to be
depressed
Ruth feels supported by
Dave, her mood lifts a little
and she does not withdraw
from him

Figure 9.2 Three-column formulation of episodes that weaken depression
Box 9.1 Psychoeducational handout on depression
What is depression?
Depression is a complex condition involving changes in mood, thinking, behaviour, relationships and biological functioning
including sleep and appetite.
Vulnerability to depression may be due to genetic factors or early loss experiences or both.
Current episodes of depression arise from big stressful life events or a build-up of small stresses.
These activate the vulnerability that then comes to be maintained by depressed thinking, actions and relationships.
Genetic vulnerability may be understood as a nervous system that goes slow under pressure and disrupts sleep, appetite and energy.
This going-slow process leads to depressed mood.
Early loss-related vulnerability is a set of memories about loss that have been filed away in the mind, but are taken out when a
recent loss or stress occurs. The files inform you that more and more losses will occur and this leads to depressed mood.
Overcoming depression involves learning how to control and change patterns of thinking, actions and relationships that maintain
depression and to keep the number of stresses in your life to manageable proportions.
A diagram of this explanation of depression follows.
Physical state has also been included in the diagram. Antidepressant medication may be used to improve sleep, appetite, and energy
levels. Medication takes from 4 to 6 weeks to work fully and speeds up recovery.
Psychological therapy helps you develop the skills to fight depression and prevent or delay relapse.
Two out of three people can benefit from a combined programme of psychological therapy and medication.


If you participate in therapy with your partner, this can offer you both a fresh start and a way of joining together as a team to defeat
depression.
If you are worried about your children developing depression, the chances of them inheriting a nervous system that goes slow
under pressure are only 1 in 5. This is good news: 80% of children of depressed parents do not develop depression. Depression is not
inherited, but a nervous system that goes slow under stress is, so this means people with this sort of nervous system have to make sure
they do not have too much stress at one time and have a lot of support.
Genetic Vulnerability
Nervous system that goes slow under
pressure
Early Loss Vulnerability
Memories that losses last a long
time
VULNERABILITY FACTORS
RECENT STRESS
DEPRESSED MOOD
Depressed
Physical State
Depressed
Relationships
Depressed
Behaviour
Depressed
Thinking
Sleep & Appetite
MAINTAINING FACTORS


In sessions four to eight, some part of every session was used primarily as a forum where Ruth could have her viewpoint fully listened
to and understood by David, and David would use these communication exercises to help Ruth remember particularly happy times in
their relationship when her mood had been good. These joint experiences of being understood and remembering happy episodes in their
relationship had a particularly strong effect on Ruth's mood. The couple began to incorporate these exercises into their day-to-day lives as
a way of jointly combating depression, which they came to see as a 'common enemy'. The externalisation intervention begun in the first
session gradually permeated their way of thinking about depression.
In sessions four to eight, there was also a focus on pessimistic, perfectionist and catastrophic belief systems. A particularly important
aspect of this work involved Ruth's declaration that she was frightened to recover in case it led to the end of her marriage. David and Ruth
were invited to reflect on how joint participation in therapy and the increasing amount of time they spent talking together outside the
sessions affected their attachment to each other. In response they noted that it had drawn them closer together. This observation weakened
Ruth's conviction that recovery would lead to the demise of their relationship. Her conviction dropped from 10 to 7 on a 10-point scale. The
couple came to see this belief that recovery would lead to separation as 'the voice of depression' trying to prevent them from overcoming it.
The final two sessions were devoted to reviewing how the couple had used therapy to overcome the current episode of depression
and anticipating risky situations in which relapses might occur and planning ways of dealing with them. During these sessions, Ruth
described how minor decreases in mood due to little disappointments, like not preparing a perfect dinner for guests, could lead to a spiral
of negative thinking which in turn would lead to a major drop in mood. She was invited to experiment with using the same process to
catch minor improvements in mood and to engage in a spiral of optimistic thinking that would lead to an improvement in mood. This
involved her practising with David anticipating a hopeful future by talking and visualising how they imagined things could work out well
in small and realistic ways. The couple rehearsed how they could use this skill and those of joint mood monitoring, activity scheduling and
communication to deal with future risky situations. They were also offered open-ended access to occasional review sessions, since one of
Ruth's fears was that if therapy ended, it would not be possible to return, since in previous treatment episodes she had had this experience


with half a dozen health professionals. A year after these two treatment episodes Ruth had suffered no further major relapses, but she and
David contacted me periodically to discuss lifecycle transition issues.
Clinical features
Table 9.1 contains diagnostic criteria for episodes of major depression from DSM-5 (APA, 2013) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993). A classification of
the diagnostic and other common clinical features of depression into the domains of perception, cognition, mood, behaviour, somatic state
and relationships is given in Table 9.2. The following account of the features of depression draws on extensive literature reviews (Beck &
Alford, 2009; Gotlib & Hammen, 2014; Power, 2013; Richards & O'Hara, 2014).
Loss
When depressive episodes occur, clinical features may be linked by assuming that depressed individuals have usually suffered a loss of some
sort - either a loss of an important relationship or aspect a relationship, a loss of some valued attribute such as athletic ability or health, or a
loss of status through failure in educational or work contexts.
Table 9.1 Diagnostic guidelines for major depression
DSM-5 Major Depressive Episode
Duration: Symptoms present nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.
Key symptoms Depressed mood Markedly diminished interest
or pleasure in almost all daily activities (anhedonia) most of the
ICD-10 Depressive Episode
Duration: Symptoms present nearly every day for at least 2
weeks. Key symptoms Depressed mood Loss of interest or
pleasure in pleasurable activities Decrease energy or increased

day, nearly every day Ancillary symptoms Significant change in
appetite or weight (increased or decreased) Insomnia or hypersomnia
Psychomotor retardation or agitation nearly every day Fatigue or
loss of energy nearly every day Feelings of worthlessness or excessive
or inappropriate guilt nearly every day Diminished ability to think,
poor concentration or indecisiveness nearly every day Recurrent
thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan,
or a suicide attempt or a specific suicide plan Criteria for diagnosis
and severity. 1 key symptom and at least 5 symptoms in total plus
clinically significant distress or impairment in social occupational,
educational functioning. In mild depression there are enough
symptoms to meet criteria; symptoms are mild; and there is limited
functional impairment. In severe depression there are many severe
symptoms and extreme functional impairment. Moderate severity
falls between these extremes. Exclusions. No history of manic or
hypomanic episode; not due to effects of a substance or a general
medical conditions; not better explained by another disorder (e.g.
schizoaffective disorder). Recurrent depression: Two or more major
depressive episodes with at least 2 months between episodes when
criteria are not met for a major depressive disorder.
With melancholic features: Either loss of pleasure in almost all
activities or lack of reactivity to pleasurable stimuli during worst
phase of episode and 3 or more of the following: distinct quality
fatigability Ancillary symptoms Change in appetite or
weight (increased or decreased) Disturbed sleep Psychomotor
retardation or agitation Low self-esteem or confidence Self-
reproach or guilt Reduced concentration and attention Ideas
or acts of self-harm or suicide Criteria for diagnosis and
severity. For mild depression 2 key and 4 symptoms in total.
For moderate depression 2 key and 6 symptoms in total.
For severe depression 3 key and 8 in total. Exclusions. No
history of manic episodes, not due to substance abuse, an
organic disorder or schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.
Recurrent depression. At least one previous episode of 2
weeks' duration. Somatic syndrome. 4 or the following must
be present and this is commonly associated with severe
depression: loss of interest or pleasure in pleasurable activities;
lack of emotional reactivity; waking in the morning 2 hours or
more before the usual time; depression worse in the mornings;
psychomotor retardation or agitation; marked loss of appetite
or weight (5% in a month); marked loss of libido. Psychotic
symptoms. Any of the following must be present and this
is usually associated with severe depression: delusions,
hallucinations, depressive stupor.


of depressed mood, worse in the morning, early morning waking,
marked psychomotor agitation or retardation, significant weight
loss, excessive guilt. With mood congruent psychotic features:
delusions and hallucinations with theme of inadequacy, guilt,
disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment. With mood
incongruent psychotic features: delusions and hallucinations
without depressive theme. With anxious distress: 2 of the following:
tense, restless, poor concentration due to worry, fear something
awful will happen, fear of loss of control. With mixed features: 3
of the following which are not due effect of a drug and do not meet
criteria for bipolar disorder: elevated mood, grandiosity, pressure
of speech, flight of ideas, increased energy, excessive risk taking,
decreased need for sleep. With atypical features: During most days
there is mood reactivity and 2 or more of the following: increased
appetite or weight gain, hypersomnia, leaden paralysis, chronic
interpersonal rejection sensitivity. Melancholic and catatonic
features are absent. With catatonia: 3 or more of the following:
stupor, cataplexy, waxy flexibility, mutism, negativism, posturing,
mannerism, stereotypy, grimacing, echolalia, echopraxia. With
peripartum onset: Onset during pregnancy or within a month
of delivery. With seasonal pattern: Onset in fall and winter and
remission in spring over a 2-year period.
Note: These guidelines are based on criteria in DSM-5 (APA, 2013) and ICD 10 (WHO, 1993).

Table 9.2 Clinical features of depression in adults
Perception
• Perceptual bias towards negative events
• Mood congruent hallucinations§
Cognition
• Negative view of self, world and future
• Over-general memory
• Cognitive distortions
• Inability to concentrate
• Indecision
• Suicidal ideation
• Suicidal intention*
• Excessive guilt*
• Mood congruent delusions§
Mood
• Depressed mood
• Diurnal variation in mood
• Irritable mood

• Anxiety and apprehension
• Loss of interest in pleasurable activities (anhedonia)*
• Distinct quality of depressed mood*
• Lack of emotional reactivity*

Behaviour
• Self-defeating behaviour
• Psychomotor retardation or agitation*
• Depressive stupor§
• Self-harm

Somatic state
• Fatigue
• Diminished activity
• Loss of appetite or overeating
• Aches and pains
• Early morning waking*
• Change in weight*
• Loss of interest in sex*

Relationships
• Deterioration in family relationships

• Withdrawal from peer relationships
• Poor work or educational performance
Note: *These features are associated with melancholic depression and are referred to as vegetative features or the somatic syndrome. $These features occur in
psychotic depression.
Perception
With respect to perception, having suffered a loss, depressed individuals tend to perceive the world as if further losses were probable.
Depressed people selectively attend to negative features of the environment and this in turn leads them to engage in depressive cognitions
and unrewarding behaviour patterns which further entrench their depressed mood. In severe cases of depression, individuals may report
mood congruent auditory hallucinations. We may assume that this severe perceptual abnormality is present when individuals report
hearing voices criticising them or telling them depressive things. Auditory hallucinations also occur in schizophrenia. However, the
hallucinations that occur in schizophrenia are not necessarily mood congruent.
Cognition
With respect to cognition, depressed individuals describe themselves, the world and the future in negative terms. They evaluate themselves
as worthless and are critical of their occupational and social accomplishments. Often this negative self-evaluation is expressed as guilt for
not living up to certain standards or letting others down. They see their world, including family, friends and work or school as unrewarding,
critical and hostile or apathetic. They describe the future in bleak terms and report little if any hope that things will improve. Where they
report extreme hopelessness and this is coupled with excessive guilt for which they believe they should be punished, suicidal ideas or

intentions may be reported. Extremely negative thoughts about the self, the world and the future may be woven together in severe cases into
depressive delusional systems. In addition to the content of the depressed individual's thought being bleak, they also display logical errors in
their thinking and concentration problems. Errors in reasoning are marked by a tendency to maximise the significance and implications of
negative events and minimise the significance of positive events. They also have over-general autobiographical memories. That is, they have
difficulty remembering specific happy events in detail (which might lighten their mood), but rather remember both positive and negative
past episodes in their lives in global over-general ways. In addition they have concentration, attention and decision-making problems that
lead to difficulties managing occupational, academic or leisure activities demanding sustained attention and decisiveness.
Mood
With respect to affect, low mood, diurnal variation in mood and anhedonia are key features of depression. Depressed mood is usually
reported as a feeling of sadness, emptiness, loneliness or despair. Diurnal variation in mood is particularly common in severe depression
with mood being worse in the morning. With anhedonia, depressed people report diminished interest in doing things that they previously
found pleasurable, because they have a limited ability to experience pleasure. Extreme anhedonia, a distinct quality of depressed mood and
lack or emotional reactivity to pleasant events, occurs in severe melancholic depression. During an episode of major depression as a person
moves from mild to moderate to severe depression, the increasing number and intensity of symptoms may lead to intense anxiety. That is,
fears are experienced such as 'Will this get worse? Am I stuck in this living hell forever? Will I ever be myself again? Will I be able to prevent
myself from committing suicide to escape?' Irritability may also occur, with the person expressing anger at the source of their loss, for
example anger at a deceased loved one for abandoning the grieving person, or anger at health professionals for being unable to alleviate the
depression.


Behaviour
At a behavioural level, depressed individuals may show either reduced and slowed activity levels (psychomotor retardation) or increased
but ineffective activity (psychomotor agitation). They typically fail to engage in activities that would bring them a sense of achievement
or connectedness to family or friends. That is, their behaviour seems to be self-defeating. Where individuals become immobile, this is
referred to as depressive stupor. Fortunately this is rare. One risky behavioural complication of depression is self-harm. A distinction is
made between suicidal behaviour and non-suicidal deliberate self-harm. With suicidal behaviour, self-harm is primarily motivated by the
intention to end one's life. With non-suicidal deliberate self-harm, there are other motivations. People may cut or burn themselves to distract
themselves from their depressive feelings. They may take non-lethal overdoses to elicit care from family or friends or to gain admission to
hospital and remove them from stressful situations. Suicide and self-harm are discussed in detail in Chapter 11.
Somatic state
Changes in somatic state associated with depression include fatigue, loss of energy, diminished activity, disturbances of sleep and appetite,
weight loss or failure to make age-appropriate weight gain, pain symptoms and loss of interest in sex. Typically depressed people have
difficulty sleeping and eat little due to appetite loss. These symptoms are referred to as vegetative features. With regard to sleep disturbance,
depressed people may have difficulty going to sleep, wake frequently during the night, or suffer from early morning waking. Usually, they
report having racing thoughts and engaging in depressive rumination when they can't sleep. In atypical cases of depression people may sleep
too much due to constant feelings of exhaustion and eat excessively due to increased appetite or because eating may temporarily reduce
their distress. Headaches and medically unexplained chest, back, or abdominal pain are other somatic features of depression. For some, these
pain symptoms are the first to be reported to their family doctors, and only when medical investigations of these complaints are negative
is depression considered as a possible diagnosis. All of the somatic features of depression mentioned earlier are consistent with research

findings, discussed later, that dysregulation of neurobiological, endocrine and immune functions are associated with depression and that
sleep architecture is also affected.
Relationships
At an interpersonal level, depressed individuals report a deterioration in their relationships with family, friends, work colleagues, school
teachers and other significant figures in their lives. They describe themselves as lonely and yet unable or unworthy of taking steps to make
contact with others. Ironically, when depressed people try to overcome their loneliness by talking to others, they tend to drive them away
through their pessimistic, self-centred talk and depressive behaviour.
Classification of subtypes of mood disorders
Within DSM-5 (APA, 2013) and ICD-10 (WHO, 2013) distinctions are made between the following:
• Major depression
• Bipolar disorder
• Dysthymia
• Cyclothymia.
Major depression and bipolar disorder are both episodic mood disorders. Major depression is characterised by episodes of low mood,
negative cognition, and sleep and appetite disturbance. Bipolar disorder is characterised, in addition to these, by episodes of mania in
which elation, grandiosity, flight of ideas and expansive behaviour occur. Dysthymia and cyclothymia are non-episodic chronic conditions
of at least 2 years' duration, with dysthymia being characterised by depressive symptomatology (at least three symptoms in addition to


low mood) and cyclothymia being characterised by similar but less extreme mood fluctuations than bipolar disorder. In the case example
that opened the chapter, Ruth showed a clinical picture often called 'double depression'. That is, her episodes of major depression were
superimposed on chronic non-episodic dysthymia.
The distinctions between unipolar and bipolar conditions and between episodic and persistent disorders which are central to the
classification of mood disorders in ICD-10 and DSM-5 have subordinated earlier classifications systems which made primary distinctions
between psychotic and neurotic, endogenous and reactive, and overt and masked depression (Farmer & McGuffin, 1989; Kendell, 1976;
Parker, 2009). With the psychotic/neurotic and endogenous/reactive classification systems, it was assumed that psychotic and endogenous
depressions were more severe than neurotic and reactive depressions, with the more severe conditions being due to genetic and biological
factors and requiring treatment with medication or electroconvulsive therapy, and the less severe conditions being due to environmental
factors and requiring treatment with psychotherapy (Parker, 2009). However, evidence from stressful life event research shows that all
episodes of depression, regardless of quality or severity, are preceded by stressful life events and in that sense are reactive (Monroe et al.,
2014). Treatment outcome research has shown that only about two out of three cases of depression respond to available treatments; that
symptom type or severity does not always predict which patients will respond to physical or psychological interventions; and that for most
patients multimodal therapy involving a combination of medication and psychotherapy is most effective (Beck & Alford, 2009; Paykel &
Scott, 2009). The older psychotic/neurotic and endogenous/reactive distinctions have been incorporated into DSM-5 and ICD-10, insofar
as depressive episodes may be specified as having either psychotic features or melancholic/somatic features, typical of what formerly was
referred to as endogenous depression.
With regard to the overt/masked distinction, this was introduced to take account of those whose depression was masked by medically
unexplained symptoms such as headaches and chest pains (Hoogenhout et al., 2010). Some cases that would formerly have been described
as having masked depression are classified in DSM-5 and ICD-10 as having somatoform disorder, a condition characterised by multiple
medically unexplained symptoms.

Epidemiology
From Table 2.3 in Chapter 2 it may be seen that the average 12-month prevalence of major depression is 3.7%, based on a synthesis of data
from 116 international studies (Ferrari et al., 2013). Major depression is the most common mood disorder with a lifetime prevalence rate of
6-25% in international community studies (Kessler et al., 2014; Kessler & Wang, 2009). In the US National Comorbidity Survey Replication
the lifetime prevalence of major depression was 16.6%, whereas the lifetime prevalence of dysthymia was 2.5% and of bipolar disorder was
3.9% (Kessler et al., 2005). Depression is less common among prepubertal children than adolescents and adults (Brent & Weersing, 2008). In
children equal numbers of boys and girls have depression, but this changes in adolescence; by adulthood, compared with men, about twice
as many women have depression (Hilt & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2014).
Comorbid disorders occur in most cases of depression (Richards & O'Hara, 2014). In the US National Comorbidity Survey Replication,
59% of depressed participants had comorbid anxiety disorders and 24% had comorbid substance use disorders (Kessler et al., 2014;
Kessler & Wang, 2009). In clinical samples of depressed patients, comorbid personality disorders occur in 50-85% of inpatients and 20-
50% of outpatients (Klein et al., 2009). The highest level of comorbidity occurs with cluster C personality disorders (avoidant, dependent
and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders). Depression that occurs with comorbid conditions, particularly personality disorders,
dysthymia and substance use disorders, is less responsive to treatment and so in clinical practice requires more intensive treatment
programmes.
Naturalistic studies show that major depressive disorder follows a distinctive course (Angst, 2009; Klein & Allmann, 2014). Most people
(about 90%) who experience an episode of depression recover. In community and clinical samples the median duration of episodes is about
20-30 weeks. The longer the duration of the episode, the lower the likelihood of recovery. The majority of cases recover from a depressive
episode within a year; about half of all patients continue to have fluctuating residual symptoms between episodes; for less than 10%

recovery does not occur and chronic depressive symptoms persist; and about 40% of cases relapse within 5 years. For dysthymia, about
three-quarters of cases recovery and the median time to recovery is about 4 years.
As more depressive episodes occur, there are decreases in inter-episode intervals and a reduction in the amount of stress required to trigger
the onset of further depressive episodes, an issue discussed later under stress theories (Klein & Allmann, 2014). Individuals with major
depressive disorder have about five to nine episodes over the course of their lives.
Risk factors for depression include a family history of mood disorders, female gender, low socio-economic status involving economic
and educational disadvantage, an adverse early family or institutional environment, a depressive temperament, a negative cognitive style,
deficits in self-regulation, high levels of life stress and low levels of social support from family and friends (Garber, 2010; Hammen et al.,
2010).
Risk factors for chronic or recurrent depression include younger age at onset, longer duration of depressive episode, family history of
mood disorders, comorbid anxiety personality and substance use disorders, and social isolation (Hölzel et al., 2011).
For a subgroup of people who suffer from depression, deficits in visually processing light and the season of the year are risk factors
for depression (Rosenthal, 2013). These people who experience regularly recurring depressive episodes in the autumn and winter, with
remission in the spring and summer, are said to have seasonal affective disorder. They develop symptoms in the absence of adequate light
and respond favourably to enhanced environmental lighting, often referred to as 'light therapy' (Golden et al., 2005).
In community samples about 4-7% of people with a major depressive disorder commit suicide and about 23-52% of completed suicides
have major depressive disorder (Nock et al., 2014). Risk factors for suicide in individuals with depression include male gender, family history
of psychiatric disorder, previous attempted suicide, more severe depression, hopelessness, and comorbid anxiety and alcohol substance use
disorders (Hawton et al., 2013).


Aetiology
Risk and protective factors in the aetiology of depression are presented in Table 9.3.
Predisposing factors
Genetic factors may predispose people to developing depression. From a clinical perspective a family history of depression, anxiety or
neuroticism is usually taken as evidence for a genetic vulnerability to mood dysregulation. Heritability estimates for depression range from
40-70% (Elder & Mosack, 2011; Lau et al., 2014). A concern for many parents with depression is the likelihood that they will pass depression
on to their children. If the annual prevalence of depression is taken to be about 4% and the chances of first-degree relatives with depression
is about three times that of the normal population, then 12% of children born to depressed parents will develop depression and 88% will
not. The precise biological characteristics that are genetically transmitted and the mechanisms of transmissions are still largely unknown.
However, results of studies on structural and functional brain abnormalities, neurotransmitter dysregulation, endocrine abnormalities,
immune system dysfunction, sleep architecture and circadian rhythm abnormalities in some cases suggest that a biological vulnerability
to dysregulation of one or more of these systems is probably inherited (Lopez-Munoz & Alamo, 2012; Thase et al., 2014). It is also probable
that the vulnerability is polygenetically transmitted since the results of family studies cannot easily be accounted for by simpler models of
genetic transmission.
Table 9.3 Risk and protective factors in the aetiology of depression
Risk factors
Domain
Protective factors

• Female gender
• Genetic factors (family history of depression, anxiety
or neuroticism)
• Dysregulation of limbic system and prefrontal cortex
• Dysregulation of serotonergic and noradrenergic
neurotransmission systems
• Dysregulation of neuroendocrine and immune
systems
• Dysregulation of circadian rhythm's sleep
architecture
Neurobiological factors
• Male gender
• No family history of mood dysregulation
Family-of-origin factors
• Positive childhood experiences
• At least one positive relationship with a
supportive adult in childhood
• High intelligence or a unique talent

• Childhood adversity (maltreatment or significant
loss)
• Attachment insecurity
Precipitating factors
• Major stressful life events, particularly loss,
including separation, divorce, bereavement, illness,
• Absence of major stressful life events and
losses

injury and unemployment
• Low levels of sunlight
• After 3 or more previous major depressive episodes,
minor stressful life events
• High levels of sunlight
• 3 or more previous major depressive episodes
• Neuroticism
• Pessimistic cognitive style
• Self-regulation skills deficits
• Prior episodes of depression produce changes in
neurobiological systems that make depression more
likely in response to small stresses
• Absence of a confiding relationship
• Unsupportive marriage
Psychological disorder
related factors
Personality traits and
cognitive style
Previous depressive
episodes
Current family factors
• Good mental health
• Emotional stability (low neuroticism)
• Optimistic cognitive style
• Self-regulation skills and functional
coping strategies
• Less than 3 prior episodes of depression
• Confiding relationship
• Supportive marriage

• Poor social support network
Wider social system factors
• Good social support network
• High levels of environmental stress
• Low levels of environmental stress
• Low socio-economic status
• No treatment or unimodal treatment (psychological
or pharmacological only)
Treatment system factors
• Multimodal treatment including brief
evidence-based psychological intervention
and antidepressant medication
Limbic system and prefrontal cortex
Depression is associated with abnormalities in the functioning of brain structures that subserve the experience and expression of emotions,
primarily the limbic system and those that subserve self-regulation, primarily the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. In depressed people the
limbic system (especially the amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex) is overactive, while the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is underactive
(Hamilton et al., 2012). The overactive limbic system probably subserves the ongoing experience of intense negative emotions, while
the underactive dorsolateral prefrontal cortex probably subserves a deficit in regulating these negative emotional experiences through
reappraisal and purposeful problem solving. Structural and functional brain imaging studies partially support this hypothesis (Maletic et al.,
2007; Pizzagalli & Treadway, 2014). There is some preliminary evidence that successful psychological and pharmacological treatments of
depressed adults normalise these abnormalities in different ways. Psychological interventions such as cognitive therapy probably ameliorate


depression by increasing activity in the prefrontal cortex, whereas antidepressant medication probably alleviates depression by decreasing
limbic system overactivity (Clark & Beck, 2010; Thase et al., 2014).
Neurotransmitters and antidepressants
Multiple potential candidate genes for depression have been identified. Some of these are associated with the serotonergic and noradrenergic
neurotransmission systems. The efficiency of both of these systems is reduced in depression, compromising neurotransmission within and
between brain structures associated with mood regulation. Antidepressant drugs increase the efficiency with which these systems operate
(Gitlin, 2014; Thase et al., 2014).
Neuroendocrine and immune systems
Overactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which results in raised cortisol levels, and consequent reduced efficiency in
the functioning of the immune system occurs in depression (Thase et al., 2014; Wilkinson & Goodyer, 2011). There is some evidence that
individuals exposed to childhood adversity may be at increase risk of depression, because early exposure to extreme stress leads to long-term
dysregulation of the HPA axis.
Sleep architecture and circadian rhythms
Depression is associated with a disruption of sleep architecture and circadian rhythms. Psychophysiological studies show abnormal sleep
architecture underpins depressive sleep disturbance (Thase et al., 2014). Depressed people spend more time in rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep and less time in slow wave sleep. They also show shorter REM onset latency. Up to 60% of depressed people temporarily
recover following sleep deprivation, although they relapse after even a brief sleep (Hemmeter et al., 2010). Antidepressants regularise
abnormal sleep architecture, probably by normalising serotonergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission systems which are dysregulated
in depression and regulate sleep architecture. Light therapy, which artificially extends exposure to daylight during short winter days to the

duration of long summer days is an effective treatment for seasonal affective disorder, suggesting that seasonal depression is associated with
disrupted circadian rhythms (Monteleone et al., 2011; Pail et al., 2011).
In summary there is considerable support for a partially genetically determined neurobiological vulnerability to mood dysregulation.
This vulnerability involves overactivity of the limbic system and underactivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, dysregulation of
the serotonergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission systems, HPA axis overactivity, elevated cortisol levels, reduced immune system
efficiency and disturbed sleep architecture. Antidepressant medication, which is effective for severe but not mild or moderate depression,
alleviates depression by increasing the efficiency of serotonergic and noradrenergic neurotransmitter systems. Psychotherapy, in contrast,
probably alleviates depression by increasing activity in the prefrontal cortex.
Social and psychological factors
A range of social and psychological factors may predispose people to developing depression. These include low socio-economic status
involving economic and educational disadvantage, childhood adversity (characterised by maltreatment or significant loss experiences),
attachment insecurity, a depressive temperament, neuroticism, a negative cognitive style, self-regulation skills deficits, high levels of life
stress and low levels of social support from family and friends (Dozier et al., 2008; Garber, 2010; Goodman & Lusby, 2014; Hammen et al.,
2010; Hammen & Shih, 2014; Hilt & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2014; Joormann & Arditte, 2014; Kampman & Poutanen, 2011; Kotov et al., 2010;
Monroe et al., 2014).
Precipitating factors
First episodes of major depression are typically precipitated by major stressful life events, particularly those associated with loss such
as separation, divorce bereavement, illness, injury and unemployment. Seasonal depression occurs in winter, probably in response to low
levels of sunlight and is marked by hypersomnia, overeating, carbohydrate craving and weight gain. The threshold at which depression can

be triggered decreases with second and subsequent episodes, so that for people who have experienced three or more episodes, only minor
stresses may precipitate a full-blown major depressive episode.
This may be due to the neurobiological process of kindling (Monroe & Harkness, 2005) and the cognitive process of rumination
(McLaughlin & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2011). According to cognitive therapists, small stresses, which lead to small negative mood changes, can
give rise to chronic rumination and catastrophising and precipitate later episodes of depression. According to neurobiological theorists,
multiple episodes of depression, through a process of kindling, probably render the neurobiological systems that maintain depression more
vulnerable to depressogenic changes in response to minor stresses.
Maintaining factors
Depressed mood is maintained by ongoing high levels of environmental stress, with demands exceeding personal coping and self-regulation
resources and a tendency to inadvertently create stressful life situations; low activity levels; a constricted lifestyle with little positive
social interaction; poor social skills; unsupportive relationships with family members (including partners); a depressive cognitive style; and
probably by dysregulation of neurobiological systems mentioned earlier (Aldao et al., 2010; Beach et al., 2014; Gotlib & Joorman, 2010;
Hammen & Shih, 2014; Joiner & Timmons, 2009; Joormann & Arditte, 2014; Liu & Alloy, 2010; Monroe et al., 2014; Thase et al., 2014).
Protective factors
On the positive side, protective factors, particularly in cases where childhood adversity occurred, include at least one positive early
relationship with an adult in childhood, high intelligence or a unique talent. Protective factors in adulthood include social support in the
form of a confiding relationship, a supportive marriage, a good social support network, learned and self-regulation skills and functional
coping strategies (Carr, 2011; Ungar et al., 2013).


Response of acute depression to treatment
About a half to two-thirds of cases of acute depression recover after a course of pharmacological and psychological treatment, compared
with about a third of clients who receive a placebo pill (Craighead et al., 2007; Nemeroff & Schatzberg, 2007). The current treatment of choice
is a multimodal programme in which a relatively brief evidence-based psychological therapy is combined with antidepressant medication.
Multimodal programmes are preferred to unimodal programmes because response to treatment is more rapid with a multimodal approach,
and relapse after termination of pharmacological treatment is delayed longer for clients who have received psychological treatment (Butler
et al., 2006; Hollon et al., 2006). This is a critical issue since major depression is an episodic disorder and relapse is to be expected.
Course
The course of depression in the presence and absence of maintenance therapy has been well documented (American Psychiatric Association,
2010; Judd, 1997; Klein & Allmann, 2014; Segal et al., 2013; Weissman et al., 2000). Eighty-five percent of clients experience recurrent
episodes of depression, and on average people with major depression have five to nine episodes of 20-30 weeks each over the course of
their lifetimes. As the condition progresses the frequency and duration of depressive episodes increases. Relapse rates for those recovering
from a first or second episode of depression who are treated with antidepressants and who do not receive psychological or pharmacological
maintenance treatment is 20-35%, but for those with a history of three or more previous episodes is about 60-80%. Recurrent depression
has distinctive features notably, early morning waking, diurnal variation in mood, lack of responsivity to environmental circumstances
and high levels of the stress hormone, cortisol. US and UK treatment outcome studies show that after 14-24 months, 50-80% clients who
only receive antidepressants relapse, compared with 20-35% of those who also receive CBT. These studies included mixed groups of clients
who had experienced one or more episodes of depression. Current maintenance therapies that include continuation of antidepressant


pharmacological treatment or psychological maintenance treatment can reduce relapse rates from about 60-80% to about 20-37%.
Psychological maintenance treatments include interpersonal therapy and a CBT protocol that includes training in mindfulness meditation
skills. For clients with recurrent depression involving three or more episodes, monthly interpersonal therapy sessions over a 1-year period
or an eight-session course of mindfulness-based cognitive behaviour therapy have been shown to reduce relapse rates from about two-
thirds to one-third (Segal et al., 2013; Weissman et al., 2000). For pregnant women, those undergoing surgery, those who cannot tolerate the
side effects of antidepressants, and those ideologically opposed to medication, psychological maintenance treatment is vital. Altogether this
group constitutes 30-40% of cases.
Assessment, formulation and contracting for treatment
In the management of mood problems, the first priority is to assess risk of self-harm. A structured approach to the assessment and
formulation of suicide risk informed by Jobes (2006) is given in Chapter 11. Once suicide risk has been managed, the second priority is to
clarify the nature and extent of symptomatology. The diagnostic criteria in Table 9.1 and the clinical features in Table 9.2 offer a useful
basis for interviewing in this area. Self-report questionnaires and rating scales that may supplement clinical interviewing are listed at the
end of this chapter. The third priority is to identify important predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors, listed earlier,
associated with depression. The interview plan in Table 8.2 may be used for this aspect of the assessment.
Differential diagnosis
In making the differential diagnosis of major depression, rule out depression due to bipolar disorder (covered in Chapter 10) or another
psychological problem such as psychosis (covered in Chapter 25). Depression may occur with a range of other comorbid conditions including
anxiety disorders (covered in Chapters 13-18), substance misuse (covered in Chapter 24) or a painful or severe medical condition (covered

in Chapters 20 and 21). It is particularly important to rule out bipolar disorder by enquiring about manic or hypomanic episodes, because
antidepressants can precipitate episodes of hypomania and lead to a long-term rapid-cycling course for people with bipolar disorder.
Syndromal formulation
Following thorough assessment and diagnosis a syndromal case formulation may be drawn up that links predisposing, precipitating,
maintaining and protective factors to depressive symptomatology, potential treatment goals and possible plans for reaching these. For
example, with the case presented at the start of this chapter, a very general formulation was given in the first session of treatment when
it was noted that the episode of major depression that led to the referral had been precipitated by a build-up of minor stressful life events.
Ruth's vulnerability to depression stemmed from her experience of multiple previous episodes and from both genetic and early childhood
factors. Her low mood, pessimistic, perfectionist and guilt-oriented thinking style, constricted lifestyle, and the physiological dysregulation
evidenced by her abnormal patterns of sleep, eating and sexual activity were mutually reinforcing and this maintained her depression. On
the positive side there were a number of protective factors in this case. Ruth was very intelligent, she had the capacity to make and maintain
friendships, she had a good marriage, good relationships with her four children, and had shown in the past that she could use psychotherapy
to recover from depression.
Stepped care
Current best practice is to take stepped-care approach to the treatment of depression. For people with mild to moderate depression, a
guided self-help approach may initially be taken. Clients may be offered bibliotherapy or computer-based self-help interventions (Andrews
et al., 2010; Gregory et al., 2004). Brief structured CBT, psychodynamic or systemic psychological treatment may be offered to cases that
do not respond to self-help. This may be offered alone or in combination with antidepressants, depending on patient preferences. For
chronic relapsing depression, mindfulness-based CBT may be offered to delay or prevent relapse. For severe depression, hospitalisation may

be necessary. This overall approach to the management of depression is consistent with international best practice guidelines (American
Psychiatric Association, 2010; NICE, 2009).
Formulation for psychotherapy
While syndromal formulation may suffice for self-help interventions, further refinements to this general formulation will be necessary
for conducting CBT, interpersonal or systemic therapy. For CBT, following the model in Figure 3.1 in Chapter 3, it would be necessary to
supplement the syndromal formulation with an ABC formulation to specify the sort of daily situations (A) that prompted such automatic
thoughts (B) along with the emotional, behavioural and physiological consequences (C) of these and how these feed back into and reinforce
core beliefs and assumptions. For interpersonal therapy an approach to case formulation will be described later. For systemic therapy,
problem and exception formulations like those in Figures 9.1 and 9.2, which follow the three-column formulation model described in
Chapter 6, may be drawn up.
Contracting for treatment and goal setting
After assessment, present the syndromal formulation to the client in a way that matches the client's readiness and ability to understand
it and that highlights the client's strengths. The psychoeducational handout in Box 9.1 may be helpful in giving feedback. This process of
giving feedback partially involves socialising the client into a complex biopsychosocial way of conceptualising mood problems. Some clients
will hold implicit unifactorial theories in which they attribute their mood problems exclusively to biological factors ('My doctor said I had a
chemical imbalance in my brain'), or psychosocial problems ('My counsellor said I was depressed because I was abused as a child'). In most
instances, except where pregnancy or medical complications or ethical considerations preclude medication, it is best practice to point out
that depression involves the dysregulation of both biological and psychological processes and so a multimodal programme involving both
antidepressant medication and psychological therapy is usually the best and most effective treatment. Medication speeds up recovery in


the short term. Psychotherapy helps clients develop self-regulation skills to prevent relapses. When the client has understood and accepted
the formulation, collaboratively explore and identify possible treatment goals. With goal setting, the aim is to define clear, unambiguous,
visualizable, measurable, positively stated goals for problem resolution. 'I'd like to feel better' is a vague goal. 'I'd like to have a mood rating
of at least 5 on a 10-point scale for at least an hour a day for a full week' is a far more clearly defined goal. In light of specified goals, offer
a time-limited contract for therapy specifying scheduling details and client and therapist responsibilities within the therapeutic contract;
a realistic, evidence-based statement of the chances that the client will benefit from therapy; and a statement of the sacrifices the client
will have to make in terms of time, energy, financial investment and so forth for the therapy to work. Detailed guidance on contracting for
therapy within the context of CBT, psychodynamic and systemic practice models are given in Chapters 3, 4 and 6.
Acknowledging the inevitability of resistance
Regardless of what psychotherapeutic approach is taken to the treatment of depression, in chronic cases resistance is inevitable and
core process issues will emerge. Typically, clients and therapists fall into patterns of interaction in which they adopt polarised roles of
helpless victim and overcontrolling or hostile caregiver (McCullough, 2000). This interactional pattern may maintain rather than ameliorate
depression. Also, it typically replicates similar patterns that are occurring in the client's current life with significant members of their social
network, and patterns from their early childhood (as described in Chapter 4 on psychodynamic therapy). When contracting for any form of
psychotherapy acknowledge the inevitability of these sorts of patterns occurring as a normal part of good therapy. Also make a commitment
to the client and ask the client to make a commitment to you to try to find ways of collaborating on more equal terms in defeating depression
when these transactional patterns emerge. Let the client know that this will usually involve acknowledging that the pattern is happening,
and then proceeding to find amicable ways to share responsibility for therapeutic progress more equally without resorting to criticism or
cajoling.


Treatment of depression
There is good evidence that CBT, interpersonal, psychodynamic and systemic psychological treatment protocols are effective in treating
depression (Craighead et al., 2007; Cuijpers et al., 2008; Driessen et al., 2010; Whisman et al., 2012). There is also good reason to believe
that combining antidepressant medication with psychological therapy may lead to more rapid and enduring recovery (American Psychiatric
Association, 2010; Craighead et al., 2007; Hollon et al., 2006; Nemeroff & Schatzberg, 2007; NICE, 2009). Practical aspects of using
antidepressants are considered in a cursory way at the end of this chapter and are covered in more detail in Chapter 7. The specific guidelines
on the application of CBT, psychodynamic and systemic therapy to the treatment of depression should be read in conjunction with the more
general and detailed coverage of these approaches to psychotherapy given in Chapters 3, 4 and 6.
CBT for depression
Beck's cognitive therapy proposes that significant problematic lessons, learned through exposure to early stressful life events, frustration of
important needs, and modelling and identification in early family relationships, are encoded in maladaptive schemas (Beck, 1976; Clark et
al., 1999; Clark & Beck, 2010). Such schemas are clusters of interconnected core beliefs and assumptions about self and others in significant
relationships. For episodes of depression to occur, latent maladaptive schemas are activated in adulthood by schema-related major stressful
life events. For example, when a client whose depressive schema entailed the assumption, 'if everyone does not like me, then I am unlovable',
passed a friend on the street who did nor say hello, he had the automatic thought, 'she really hates me'; this led to a drop in mood, which
in turn prevented him from going over, greeting his friend warmly and humorously joking about her not saying hello. This in turn led to a
reduction in the amount of perceived social support available from that friend in future interactions, leaving the client more vulnerable to
further distancing and depressive interactions. Within cognitive therapy it is also proposed that once schemas are activated, people become


prone to interpreting ambiguous situations in problematic ways. The various logical errors that they make are referred to as cognitive
distortions, some of which are listed in Table 3.2 in Chapter 3.
Feelings: How I feel
Primary emotions: Low mood, sad,
anxious, irritable.
Secondary emotions: Guilt, shame,
hopelessness.
Physical: How I treat my body
Exercise: Don't walk the dog or go for a
swim. Don't do yoga.
Eating: Don't cook, go long periods
without food and then overeat junk food.
Drugs: Drink more alcohol than usual.
Sleep: Broken sleep at night, daytime
naps.
Pain: Neck pain worse.
Self-care: Don't shower or put on make-
up. Can't rest, agitated, tense.
Activity: What I do
Isolate: Go to bad, watch TV, cancel work,
cancel plans
Procrastinate: Put off tackling problems,
distract with Internet browsing.
Escape/Self-soothe: Alcohol, drugs,
comfort eating, thinking about ending it all.
Escape: Self-soothe: Gambling.
cleaning, computer games, social media.
Thoughts: What and how I think
Negative Triad
Self: I'm such a loser. Why am I like this?
What's wrong with me? Brood on current
and past faults and failures.
Others: Think about all the people who've
let me down over the years and about
people who can't understand or help me.
Think about all the problems in the world
and all the badness in people.
Compare myself to others-why can't I just
get on with it like my sister/neighbour?
Why are they able and why am I weak?
Future: I'll never get better. No one can
help me. There's something unfixably
wrong with me. What's the point?
Rumination: Thinking myself down.
Criticizing and bullying myself: Trying
to motivate myself by by giving out out to myself.


Figure 9.3 Cognitive-behavioural model of depression illustrating the vicious cycles of depression
Clients need first to understand the CBT model or to be socialised into the model. One way to do this is to introduce the idea of 'vicious
cycles', to show clients how low mood is influenced by how we treat our bodies, by the actions we engage in and avoid, and by how we think
and talk to ourselves. Clients may be shown the CBT model linking activities, thoughts, feelings and physical state to help them understand
these vicious cycles. By reviewing in detail experiences during a typical recent day with reference to Figure 9.3, clients may be helped to
discover that many of the things they intuitively do when depressed to try to help themselves feel better actually make their depression
worse. For example, in response to feeling exhausted from low mood, night-time rumination and broken sleep, a depressed woman decided
that a day in bed might help her meet her need for sleep and rest. She cancelled work and social plans. Initially she felt relief because she
anticipated getting more sleep and avoiding another terrible day. However, this was followed by thoughts about letting others down, by self-
critical thoughts about being useless or weak compared to others who had gone to work, and by feelings of guilt and shame. Not going to
work led to isolation from others and loss of ordinary routines. It also created many opportunities during the day to ruminate and have
negative thoughts about the self, others and the future. When she got up, she did not have the energy to make breakfast, and drank lots of
coffee to try to kick-start her day. She tried to focus on the household task of paying a bill, but felt agitated and unable to concentrate. In
response to this she turned on the television to distract herself. In the afternoon she realised that she was hungry and ate some leftover pizza
and cereal. This led to her feeling overly full and nauseous. To distract herself from rising levels of negative emotions, she surfed the Internet
and engaged in online gambling. However, this was followed by more self-critical thoughts about time wasting, being useless, and about her
problems getting worse. At 6 p.m. she had a few beers to try to relax. She started to watch a film, but fell asleep on the couch. When she awoke
it was late, so she went to bed. She was unable to get back to sleep and had a broken night's sleep. By the end of this day, her low mood has
been strengthened by the consequences of actions such as staying in bed, drinking coffee, doing distracting things and engaging in self-
critical rumination, some of which were intended to help lift her mood but made her feel more depressed. In addition, by the end of the day,

her feelings of sadness and anxiety were compounded by feelings of shame, guilt and hopelessness. The psychologist said to this client that
she understood that she did not intend to make her depression worse. On the contrary she was actively trying hard to improve her mood.
CBT was then described as an intervention that would not require her to try harder to be happy, but to try differently. CBT would help her
learn and put into practice different ways to cope that might have better outcomes. These ways of coping might not instantly lift her
depressed mood, but would be more adaptive and helpful in the long term. They would help her to break out of 'vicious cycles' of activities,
thoughts, feelings and physical states associated with depressed mood, and to set up instead some 'virtuous cycles' that would improve her
mood.
The goal of CBT is to help the client first of all monitor mood changes (C) and link them to changes in activating events (A). In the early
stages of therapy, the focus is on helping clients reactivate themselves by using behavioural strategies. These include scheduling activities
and pleasant events. Once the client is reactivated the focus of therapy shifts from behavioural to cognitive strategies. Through 'thought
catching' clients come to identify the negative automatic thoughts (B) that are elicited by activating events. Clients use the daily thought
record to keep track of the way their negative automatic thoughts impact on their mood state. When this skill is learned, clients are shown
how to develop alternative, more positive ways of reappraising activating events. They also learn to test the relative validity of their negative
automatic appraisals of activating events and their more positive reappraisals by examining the evidence for both. This liberates clients from
slavishly interpreting many events in their lives in negative and depressing ways. Instead they come to gradually interpret more and more
minor events in their lives in more positive ways. Each time they do this, their mood improves, or at least does not deteriorate more. Very
gradually they come to see themselves as not totally unworthy, the world as not totally uncontrollable, and the future as not totally hopeless.
In the later stages of therapy, clients are invited to examine their underlying assumptions and core beliefs and to carefully find evidence
to challenge the depressogenic schemas that leave them vulnerable to further episodes of depression. In McCullough's (2000) cognitive
behavioural analysis, clients learn to replace ineffective beliefs and coping strategies with more effective alternatives. In all forms of CBT,
clients develop strategies for identifying and managing life stresses that might precipitate relapses. In maintenance-oriented, mindfulness-

based CBT (Segal et al., 2013), clients learn to use meditation to prevent relapse. As part of the therapeutic process, clients may be invited
to read books such as David Burns's (1999) The Feeling Good Handbook, Paul Gilbert's (2009) Overcoming Depression, or Greenberger and
Padesky's (1995) Mind Over Mood, all of which are well-written CBT-based self-help books. Detailed CBT manuals for therapists are listed at
the end of the chapter.
Reactivation using behavioural strategies
After assessment and formulation, much of the first part of CBT focuses on reactivation.
For reactivation the overall aim is to help clients become more physically active and to engage in more pleasant events in their daily lives.
Activity scheduling
Begin by helping the client discover the link between physical activity level and mood. Asking depressed clients to remember their moods
and the activities associated with them often yields little information because of the tendency for depressed people to remember only
negative things in an overly general way. In therapy, the link between activity and mood can be established by asking clients to give a mood
rating on a 10-point scale, then engage in a physical activity like pacing up and down the room 10 or 20 times until their mood improves
by one point on the 10-point scale. Another option is to ask clients to keep a diary for a week and note down each day on an hourly basis
the activity they did for that hour and their mood rating on a 10-point scale. By examining this diary, evidence for a link between activity
level and mood can be established. Once clients discover the link between activity and mood, invite them to schedule brief periods of daily
physical activity and to keep a diary of their mood ratings before and after these activity periods. Review these diaries and use evidence from
them to further reinforce clients' acknowledgement of the link between activity and mood and their motivation to exercise daily.
Pleasant event scheduling
In a similar vein, invite client to list events that have brought them or might in the future bring them high levels of pleasure or a sense of


mastery as rated on 10-point scales. Then help clients to schedule some of these activities into their lives by planning each day to do one or
more of these pleasant events at specific times and in specific circumstances. Ask clients to keep a diary of their mood ratings before and after
these pleasant events. Review these diaries and use evidence from them to further reinforce clients' acknowledgement of the link between
pleasant events and mood and their motivation to do something pleasant every day.
Graded task assignment and self-reward
For activity and pleasant event scheduling, encourage clients to start with small tasks and gradually assign themselves increasingly more
demanding and challenging tasks. Then coach them in using rewarding self-statements to self-reinforce their completion of self-assigned
tasks.
Managing insomnia
Sleep difficulties may interfere with the reactivation process. For these, give instructions on sleep hygiene in Box 9.2 (Edinger & Carney,
2015; Morin & Espie, 2003). If clients are to be prescribed antidepressants as part of a multimodal programme and insomnia is a central
feature of the depressive presentation, sedative antidepressants taken before retiring may resolve the sleep problem. Where sleep problems
do not respond with either of these measures, benzodiazepines may be considered.
Box 9.2 Sleep hygiene
Keep a record of the times you spend sleeping each day throughout this programme. This should take account of daytime naps and
periods of late night or early morning waking.
1. Set a goal of what 'a good night's sleep' would entail (e.g. 7 hours unbroken sleep)

2. Set regular times for going to bed and rising
3. Avoid all daytime naps
4. Make your bedroom quiet, dark and heated to a level that you find comfortable
If you need a clock in your room, use an electric one with a dim display, not a loud-ticking mechanical clock with a bright luminous
display which may keep you awake.
For two hours before going to bed, avoid vigorous exercise, heavy meals, smoking, and all drinks, especially those containing
alcohol, caffeine or stimulants.
Practise the relaxation, breathing and visualisation exercise in Table 3.5 in Chapter 3 before sleeping, and focus on doing the
exercises well, not trying to fall asleep, as this may induce sleep-preventing anxiety.
Use your bed for sleep and sex only, not for reading, talking on the phone or any other activity associated with wakefulness.
If you do not fall asleep within 20 minutes, go to another room and write down any negative racing thoughts and make a
commitment to read and challenge them in the morning.
Finally, expect this programme to take effect slowly and monitor progress on your daily record of sleep and wakefulness.
Cognitive restructuring using cognitive strategies
Once clients have become reactivated through behavioural interventions, much of the second part of CBT focuses on using cognitive
strategies to help them change their depressive thinking routines. Cognitive restructuring involves self-monitoring, thought catching and
using a variety of techniques to challenge negative automatic thoughts, cognitive distortions, underlying assumptions and core beliefs.


ABC analysis, thought catching and self-monitoring
Begin with an ABC analysis of a specific situation where a drop in mood (C) occurred on a 10-point scale. Invite the client to pinpoint the
activating event (A) that led to the mood change. Then invite the client to guess what they must have told themselves about the activating
event for it to lead to a drop in mood from, say, 5 to 3 on a 10-point scale. Helping clients to articulate these negative self-statements or
negative automatic thoughts (B) can be a slow process and may require prompting. But after practising thought catching in therapy sessions
in response to minor fluctuations in mood, clients may be invited to regularly monitor significant mood changes that occur each day and for
each of these to record the mood change (C), the activating event (A) that preceded the mood change, and the intervening automatic thought
(B) or appraisal of the situation that caused the drop in mood. Give clients a three-column ABC daily thought record to use for this self-
monitoring task.
Questioning the evidence
When clients have successfully completed a period of self-monitoring using a three-column ABC daily thought record and developed good
'thought catching' skills, invite them in therapy to list evidence for and against a specific negative automatic thought (B) associated with
a specific activating event (A). Questioning the evidence involves inviting clients to distance themselves from the automatic thought or
assumption and to accept that a pessimistic interpretation of an activating event is only one possible interpretation of the situation, not
a true fact. Distancing sets the stage for stating the evidence for or against the negative automatic thought. The client is invited to state
or write down an alternative balanced belief to replace the negative automatic thought or assumption. Once clients have stated or written
down the new belief, ask them to rate the degree to which they believe it on a scale from 1 to 10. Also invite them to state or write down
the emotion this new belief makes them feel and to rate its intensity on a scale from 1 to 10. Finally, invite them to note if there has been
an improvement in their emotional state. This final step offers proof for the effectiveness of the cognitive strategy in improving the client's


well-being. A thought record that is specially designed for this technique is contained in Table 3.4 in Chapter 3. In the first three columns, the
activating events (A), negative automatic thoughts (B), and low moods (C) arising from these thoughts are noted. In the next two columns,
evidence for and against negative automatic thoughts is given. In the sixth column, an alternative, more balanced interpretation of the
situation is recorded. Finally, the last column is used to record information about emotional and cognitive changes arising from questioning
the evidence for the negative belief. This thought record can be used within therapy sessions to provide focus for questioning the evidence,
and as the basis for a homework assignment of using questioning the evidence in their day-to-day lives as a coping strategy.
Behavioural experiments
To generate evidence to test the validity of negative automatic thoughts, underlying assumptions, or core beliefs, invite clients to set up
behavioural experiments. In setting these up, collaboratively develop tasks that will have a good chance of refuting the client's negative
beliefs and make sure that the client fully understands exactly what they are being invited to do. In the case example at the start of the
chapter, Ruth believed that she always forgot important family events and so was a failure as a mother. As a behavioural experiment to
test this belief, she put a big poster up in the kitchen to remind her to go to her son's football match on Friday. Afterwards she wrote down
exactly what her son did and said. In the session that followed, this experiment was reviewed and led Ruth to believe that under certain
circumstance she could remember some important things and that in these situations her child did not behave as if she were a bad mother,
but rather a good-enough mother. When setting up these sorts of experiments, invite clients to anticipate possible problems and collaborate
on developing a list of strategies to overcome setbacks. Also ask clients to write down the outcome of experiments and whether they
supported their negative beliefs or not.
Modifying negative cognitions
There are many ways to modify negative automatic thoughts, cognitive distortions, underlying assumptions, and core beliefs. Consider

using the following techniques, which are described in Chapter 3, in modifying depressive cognitions: belief surveys, challenging
distortions, thinking in shades of grey, re-attribution, cost-benefit analysis, focusing on the positive, showing self-compassion, using less
extreme language, pie chart analysis, core belief test and the positive daily log.
Building self-compassion to tackle self-criticism
Building self-compassion is a cognitive strategy for addressing self-critical rumination which maintains and escalates depression. In helping
clients to build self-compassion the first step is to show how critical self-talk lowers mood and sets up vicious negative cycles of feeling awful
about the self. This may be illustrated using Figure 9.3. Clients then are invited to engage in the exercise described in Box 9.3 to build a kind,
wise, compassionate inner voice to counteract critical self-talk or the internal critic (Gilbert, 2013). For those who experienced early trauma
or prolonged micro-trauma, this internal critic is the internalised messages of harsh, critical caregivers. Building self-compassion as an adult
is a way of addressing this early deficit in receiving compassionate care from parents or other caregivers.
Box 9.3 Compassion building exercise
In this exercise, we will work on building compassion for yourself, on generating and directing a flow of kindness, openness,
warmth and gentleness towards yourself.
First, sitting comfortably in a chair, tune into your breathing and allow your breathing to find its own rhythm.
Now imagine that you are a wise and compassionate person. Imagine what the ideal qualities of kindness and compassionate are
and imagine that you have them. Spend time imagining what it might feel like to have these qualities now.
Imagine having great kindness. Imagine what this might feel like. What would it feel like in your body?
Imagine having great wisdom and what that might feel like.
Imagine having great strength and courage. Imagine what that might feel like.

Think about what other qualities a compassionate you might have and imagine what they might feel like. Where do you feel them
in your body?
Adopt a kind and compassionate facial expression. Notice what happens in your body as you do this.
Imagine how your voice would sound and be if you were full of compassion. Listen to it in your head, its tone, its warmth, its speed,
and what it says. Notice what feelings are in your body as you listen to this compassionate voice.
This exercise can be done daily, and even a few minutes 'under the duvet' in the morning and last thing at night can help to build
and strengthen your inner compassion.
Note: Adapted from Gilbert, 2009.
Mindfulness meditation (described later) teaches clients to create some distance between themselves and the depressive internal critical
thought process. It helps clients to allow this critical voice to just be, and to reduce engagement with this critical voice. Building self-
compassion through engaging in compassionate mindfulness exercises such as that in Box 9.3 adds an extra dimension to the mindfulness
process by helping clients to actively create a new internal compassionate voice.
Developing effective coping strategies
McCullough (2000) has developed a cognitive behavioural analysis system of psychotherapy in which there is a focus on helping clients
develop more effective coping strategies. An underlying assumption of this approach to therapy is that coping strategies used by clients with
chronic depression rarely lead to clients having their needs met. Situational analysis is McCullough's main therapeutic technique. Clients
are invited in each therapy session to describe problematic or challenging interpersonal situation. For each situation, they must describe in
detail (1) the sequence of events; (2) their interpretation and beliefs about the situation; (3) what exactly they did and said to cope with the
situation; (4) the actual outcome specifying what happened, what they thought and what they felt; (5) the desired outcome specifying what

they would have liked to have happened and what they would have liked to have thought and felt; and (6) whether the desired outcome was
achieved. You may interview clients using this questioning format and also ask clients to keep a record of problematic situations between
sessions using these six headings. For each situation invite clients to consider alternative interpretations of the situation and alternative
behavioural coping strategies that they could have used to achieve the outcome they desired rather than the one that actually happened.
Finally invite clients to consider in future how they might apply the lessons learned through analysis of the situation to similar future
situations.
Addressing resistance in CBT
Where clients have difficulty following through on any CBT tasks, invite them to recall all the blocks to task completion and then to
anticipate possible blocks they might encounter when they attempt such tasks in future. Collaborate with clients in brainstorming coping
strategies for overcoming blocks to task completion and then rehearsing these in therapy. For therapists one of the major challenges in
managing resistance effectively is to avoid becoming overly dominant, active or hostile, since these interpersonal styles increase clients'
tendencies to respond with submissiveness, underactivity and withdrawal. McCullough (2000) argues that therapists should assess the
reactions clients elicit in them after the second session using Kiesler's (1987) Impact Message Inventory to make them aware of unhelpful
knee-jerk reactions clients elicit in them. The management of these reactions should be routinely reviewed in supervision.
Disengagement
In later sessions of CBT, recap lessons learned during therapy about mood management and help clients anticipate and plan how to
manage future situations in which there is risk of relapse. For clients who have had three or more episodes of depression, consider offering
mindfulness maintenance therapy to further delay or prevent relapses.


CBT-mindfulness maintenance therapy
Mindfulness maintenance therapy is premised on the idea that relapses occur when minor stresses that lead to small initial mood changes
are negatively interpreted and result in an avalanche of rumination and catastrophic negative thinking. This in turn leads to drastic
intensification of depressive mood, and subsequent constriction of activity and dysregulation of neurobiological systems underpinning
depression (Segal et al., 2013). The aim of mindfulness-based CBT is to train clients in the mindfulness skills required to nip this process in
the bud. Clients learn to decentre or distance themselves from their thinking processes. They learn, 'I am not my thoughts and my thoughts
are not the truth or reality; they are simply thoughts.' Ask clients to regularly set aside periods of 15-45 minutes a day and during these
periods to practise mindfulness meditations such as those in Boxes 9.4, 9.5 and 9.6. As thought, feelings and bodily sensations arise in these
exercises in consciousness, however pleasant or unpleasant, clients acknowledge their occurrence in a welcoming, invitational and friendly
way, but then let them go without trying to change or fix them. This mindfulness practice helps clients detach themselves from all types of
ideas and sensations that enter consciousness and is helpful in allowing them to let go of depressive thoughts when they arise in response
to minor decreases in mood. The attitude of mindfulness prevents clients from getting stuck in vicious cycles of catastrophic thinking
central to the depressive experience or in personal battles centred on trying to find evidence for positive interpretations and against negative
interpretations of situations, central to routine CBT. In mindfulness-based CBT, there is no attempt to coach clients in stopping or preventing
the occurrence of depressive thought or negative affect. Rather, the focus is on helping clients observe these negative thoughts and feelings
and then let them pass. Developing this skill requires daily practice of mindfulness exercises such as those in Boxes 9.4, 9.5 and 9.6.
Box 9.4 Body scan meditation
Lie down on your back on a mat in a place where you will not be disturbed or distracted. Allow your eyes to close.
Allow your attention to focus on your breathing.

Bring your awareness to where your body makes contact with the mat on which you are lying.
On each out breath, allow yourself to sink a little deeper into the mat.
Remind yourself that your intention is not to relax, but as best you can to bring your attention to focus on each part of your body in
turn.
Bring you attention to your lower abdomen and notice the sensations that occur as you breathe in and out.
Bring your attention to your right leg, down your right leg to your right foot, and out to the toes of the right foot. Focus on each of
the toes in turn and notice the quality of sensations you find.
Now, as you inhale imagine your breath passing down into your lungs, through your abdomen down your right leg and into your
foot and from there into the toes of your right foot. As you exhale imagine your breath passing from your toes, into the foot, up the leg
into your abdomen, chest and out through your nose. Continue this for a few breaths, breathing down into the toes and back out from
the toes.
Now, when you are ready for an out breath, let go of awareness of your toes and bring awareness to the sensations in the bottom
of your right foot. Notice the sensations in the sole of the foot, the heel where it connects with the mat, and the instep. As you inhale
imagine your breath passing down into your lungs, through your abdomen down your right leg and into your foot. As you exhale
imagine your breath passing from the foot, up the leg into your abdomen, chest and out through your nose. Continue this for a few
breaths, breathing down into the foot and back out from the foot. Allow the sensations in your foot to be in the foreground of your
awareness and your breath to be in the background.
Now allow the awareness to expand into the rest of your foot, to the top of the foot, the ankle, the joints and other parts of the foot.
Then, as you exhale let go of awareness of the foot and bring your attention to the lower leg, calf, shin, knee and so forth in turn.

Continue to bring awareness and gentle curiosity to the physical sensations in each part of your body in turn ... to the upper right
leg, your left toes, foot, leg, pelvic area, back, abdomen, chest, fingers, hands, arms, shoulders, neck, head and face. As you leave each
area, breathe into it as you inhale and then let go of the region as you exhale.
When you become aware of tension or any other intense sensation in a particular part of your body, breathe into them and bring
your awareness right into the sensation as you inhale and let go or release awareness from the sensation as you exhale.
From time to time, the mind will drift away from the breath and the body. This is what the mind naturally does. When this happens,
acknowledge it, noticing where the mind has drifted. Gently return your attention to that part of the body you were focusing on before
your mind drifted.
When you have scanned all parts of the body, spend a few minutes being aware of the body as a whole and of the breath flowing in
and out of the body.
If you drift into sleep when doing this body scan meditation, you may prefer to do it in a sitting position.
Box 9.5 Mindfulness of breathing
Sit in a chair with feet flat on the floor, the spine straight and not resting against the chair back, and the eyes gently closed.
Bring awareness to the sensations where your body makes contact with the chair and the floor.
Bring awareness to sensations in the lower abdominal wall as the breath moves in and out of the body.
Follow with your awareness the changing physical sensations in the abdomen as the breath enters your body as you inhale, the
slight pause that may occur before you exhale, the sensations that occur as you exhale, and the slight pause that may occur before you
inhale again.


There is no need to control your breathing. Just allow it to occur. In the same way allow your experience to be your experience
without trying to control it.
From time to time, the mind will drift away from the breath. This is what the mind naturally does. When this happens,
acknowledge it, noticing where the mind has drifted. Gently return your attention to the abdominal wall again as the breath moves in
and out of the body.
When you notice your awareness has drifted, congratulate yourself for coming back to being aware of your present experience.
When the mind drifts, see these as opportunities to bring patience, gentle curiosity, and kindness to your awareness as you lead it
back to focus on the breath.
Continue for 15 minutes, using your breath as an anchor to gently reconnect you to the present moment each time your notice your
mind has wandered.
Box 9.6 Daily mindfulness
When you are faced with very challenging situations that you cannot control, your mood may drop. If you notice this drop, you may
try to improve your mood by looking for ways to control the situation.
As you inevitably fail in your attempts to control the uncontrollable, your mood may worsen further; you judge your efforts as
ineffective and yourself as incompetent.
In these circumstances, practise your mindfulness skills.
Acknowledge your drop in mood as an event that occurred, but do not judge it as good or bad.
Focus attention on your breathing, and if your mind drifts to planning ways to control the uncontrollable, acknowledge these
thoughts as events and return your awareness to your breathing as your thoughts pass.


To be able to do this in times of crisis, practise daily mindfulness.
When you wake, before you get out of bed, bring attention to your breathing and observe five mindful breaths.
When you change posture, practise mindfulness. As you move from lying down, to standing, to sitting, to walking, be mindful of
these changes in posture, bringing awareness to the changing sensations.
When there are noticeable changes in your environment, practise mindfulness. When you hear the phone ring, a car horn sound or
a door closing, use the sound as a signal to observe five mindful breaths.
When you eat, bring awareness to the taste, smell and sensations associated with eating your food.
When you do routine activities, practise mindfulness. Bring attention to your sensations at the moment, to the feel of the wind on
your face if you are walking, to the feel of the water if you are washing the dishes, to the sensations of standing still if you are queuing.
Before you sleep, bring attention to your breathing and observe five mindful breaths.
A useful conceptual distinction is made in mindfulness based cognitive therapy between the 'doing' and 'being' mode, which is included in
the rationale given for practising mindfulness meditations. When there is a discrepancy between the way our lives are now and the way we
would like them to be, we experience negative affect and attempt to reduce this by automatically switching into the doing mode. In this
mode we plan ways to reduce the discrepancy between actual and desired circumstances. However, if reducing this discrepancy is very
challenging and beyond our control, we become stuck in endless rumination which in turn intensifies negative affect. This type of
experience probably leads to relapse in people with chronic depression. The past, present and future are addressed in different ways in the
doing and being modes. In the doing mode the focus is on the past or the future: rehearsing past attempts to solve similar sorts of problems
and anticipating how these might be applied in the future. In contrast, in the being mode attention is focused on directly experiencing the
present moment. The degree of goal-directedness, monitoring and evaluation differs in the doing and being modes. In the doing mode, we

monitor and evaluate our performance in achieving the goal of reducing the gap between the actual and desired situation. In contrast, in the
being mode, we allow and welcome all experiences equally without evaluation and with wide-ranging curiosity rather than narrowly
focused goal-directedness. In the doing and being modes, we have different sorts of relationships with our thoughts and emotions. In the
doing mode, thoughts about how to reduce the discrepancy between what is and what ought to be and positive and negative feelings are
accorded the status of true reflections of reality. Thus, thoughts are things to be acted upon and feelings are things to be actively sought out
or avoided. In the being mode, thoughts and emotions are accorded a similar status as sounds, sights, smells or bodily sensations. They are
accepted as passing events that come to be objects of awareness and then pass out of consciousness. Thoughts are not seen as things to be
acted upon and feelings are not viewed as things to be prolonged or avoided. Mindfulness skills allow us to switch gears from the doing to
the being mode. This gear-switching is a core skill for preventing relapses in recurrent depression, since it provides a way out of chronic
rumination that often precipitates relapse.
In the mindfulness-based relapse prevention programme, described in detail in Segal et al. (2013), in all eight sessions clients are
instructed in body scan and mindfulness of breathing exercise, similar to those given in Boxes 9.4, 9.5 and 9.6. Key points covered by the
programme include the following:
• When we are on automatic pilot we are more likely to slip into patterns of thinking that precipitate depression, so practise mindfulness
every day.
• Negative emotions arise from negative interpretations and judgements of situations, so allow yourself to acknowledge situations without
judging them.
• When practising mindfulness, allow attention to move to positive and negative thoughts, feelings and sensations as they arise, and then
gently return attention to breathing.
• Thoughts are not facts and we are not our thoughts, so depressive thinking need not be grounds for despair.

• Know the signs of relapse, and plan to practise mindfulness when relapse threatens.
Segal et al. (2013) argue that to effectively deliver a mindfulness-based relapse prevention programme, it is important to have developed a mindfulness practice oneself. A good place to start is with Jon Kabat-Zinn's (2012) book, Mindfulness for Beginners.
Interpersonal therapy
Therapeutic interventions from the psychodynamic tradition have been shown in outcome studies to alleviate depression (Cuijpers et al., 2008; Driessen et al., 2010). Of the various models from this tradition, interpersonal therapy based on the work of Harry Stack Sullivan (1953) is the best validated (Weissman et al., 2000). In interpersonal therapy (IPT) it is assumed that depression is multifactorially determined, but that interpersonal difficulties play a central role in the maintenance of depressive symptoms. Four categories of interpersonal difficulties are of central concern in IPT: (1) grief associated with the loss of a loved one; (2) role disputes involving family members, friends or colleagues; (3) role transitions such as starting or ending relationships within the family or work context, moving jobs or houses, graduation, promotion, retirement, or diagnosis of an illness; and (4) interpersonal deficits, particularly poor social skills for making and maintaining relationships. In IPT, in the assessment and formulation stage, pay particular attention to the role of these factors in the maintenance of the current depressive symptoms. Review positive and negative changes in current and past relationships and expectations, satisfaction with, and wishes for these relationships as they relate to the current episode of depression. During feedback of the formulation to the client, highlight the way one or more factors in these four categories appears to maintain the current depression. Then establish a therapeutic contract to address these specific focal interpersonal factors that maintain the symptoms. Set specific attainable goals and specify the duration and frequency of sessions. Usually for IPT, 12-16 sessions are required for treatment to be effective. During the assessment and formulation stage, convey an acknowledgement that it is legitimate to adopt the 'sick role' and that clients do not deserve to be negatively judged for not fulfilling their social roles because of their depressive illness. However, the other side of this 'sick role' framing

of depression is that the therapeutic contract is an invitation for clients to take responsibility for recovery from their depressive illness. As
part of the therapeutic process they may be invited to read Myrna Weissman's (1995) Mastering Depression: A Patient's Guide to Interpersonal
Psychotherapy. In IPT specific therapeutic strategies are used to help clients address grief, role disputes, role transitions and interpersonal
deficits as detailed in Weissman et al.'s (2000) therapy manual.
Grief
Where grief due to complicated bereavement following the death of a loved one is a central factor maintaining depression, the aim of IPT is
to facilitate mourning and help the client find relationships and activities to compensate for the loss. To achieve this aim, use the following
strategies. Review the onset, nature and course of depressive symptoms. Review in detail the client's relationship with the deceased. Make
links between the course of the relationship with the deceased, their death, and the aftermath of this on the one hand and the course of the
depressive symptoms on the other. Concurrently facilitate the exploration and re-experiencing of feelings associated with the deceased over
the course of the relationship. When progress has been made with this grief work, shift the focus onto the future and then explore possible
ways of becoming more involved with others. Pace the transition from a focus on mourning the past and anticipating the future to match the
degree to which the client has resolved their feelings of grief and their readiness to look to the future.
Role disputes
Marital disharmony or difficulties involving other family members, friends or colleagues are among the more significant role disputes
associated with depression. Where role disputes are a central factor maintaining depression, the aim of IPT is to help the client clearly
identify the dispute and develop and implement a plan for resolving it. To achieve this aim use the following strategies. Review the onset,
nature and course of depressive symptoms. Identify the current dispute, which may be obvious (e.g. domestic violence) or covertly concealed
(e.g. an uneasy feeling about the unspoken possibility of infidelity). Explore the onset and course of the current dispute. Determine the

developmental stage of the dispute. If the client believes the dispute is irresolvable, facilitate withdrawal from the relationship in which
the dispute is occurring and mourning this loss. If the dispute has reached an impasse, increase disharmony in order to create movement
towards the stage of renegotiation. If it is at the stage where renegotiation is the aim, then facilitate this process by helping partners calmly
communicate about it. In facilitating renegotiation, help clients specify the core issue in the dispute and their different expectations and
values about this issue. In exploring the present dispute, facilitate framing it in as solvable a way as possible. Then brainstorm multiple
options for resolving it. Look at the pros and cons of each. Explore the resources available for resolving the dispute or changing the
relationship. Explore the barriers to resolving the conflict by trying to help the client answer these questions: Is the client showing a similar
pattern of conflict in this relationship as in others? What assumptions underlie the client's position in this and other similar disputes? What
is being gained by not resolving the dispute or what will be lost if it is resolved? Help the client select the best option for resolving the dispute
and then plan in detail how to implement and review the impact of this plan.
Role transitions
Starting or ending relationships within the family or work context, moving jobs or houses, graduation, promotion, retirement, or diagnosis
of an illness are some of the role transitions associated with depression. Where role transitions are a central factor maintaining depression,
IPT aims to help the client mourn the loss of the old role, appreciate the benefits of the new one, and develop a sense of mastery concerning
the demands of the new role. To achieve this aim use the following strategies. Review the onset, nature and course of depressive symptoms.
Relate the depressive symptoms to a recent role change. Review the positive and negative aspects of the new and old roles. Explore and
ventilate feelings about the loss of the old role and the process of change from one role to another. Facilitate the development of social
support and new skills to help the client manage the demands of the new role.


Social skills deficits
Where depression is maintained by difficulties making and maintaining significant relationships, the aim of IPT is to help clients reduce
social isolation and form new relationships. To achieve this aim use the following strategies. Review the onset, nature and course of
depressive symptoms. Relate the depressive symptoms to social isolation. Review positive and negative aspects of past relationships, noting
in particular repetitive self-defeating patterns that lead to isolation. Discuss the client's positive and negative feelings about the therapist
and clarify parallels between the therapeutic relationship and other current relationships in the client's life. The psychodynamic therapy
techniques described in Chapter 4 for drawing parallels between the therapeutic relationship and relationships with other significant people
in the client's life may be used here.
Specific techniques
In IPT a number of specific techniques are used to implement the strategies outlined earlier for each of the problem areas. These are:
• Exploratory techniques
Clarification
• Communication analysis
• Encouragement of affect
• Use of the therapeutic relationship
• Behaviour change techniques.
Exploratory techniques include nondirective exploration and direct elicitation. With non-directive exploration, ask open questions (e.g.
'How have you been ?') and encourage disclosure through maintaining receptive silence; supportive acknowledgement (e.g. saying 'mm,

hmm' while nodding); and encouraging extension of the topic discussed (e.g. 'Tell me more about that'). While nondirective exploration
is largely client-led, direct elicitation is a therapist-led approach to enquiry. With direct elicitation, follow a specific line of questioning to
obtain details about a specific issue ('Tell me about ...? What happened when ...? Who ...? What ...? When ...? Where ...? Why ...? How
...?'). Non-directive exploration is useful to obtain the client's perspective on a situation. Direct elicitation is a useful way to fill in details
missing from the account given by the client. Used appropriately, non-directive exploration generates a climate of acceptance and creates an
opportunity for clients to take responsibility for making sense of their difficulties, but used inappropriately with clients who have difficulty
verbalising their difficulties can lead to clients feeling despondent because they view the therapy as going nowhere and the therapist as
incompetent. Direct elicitation used appropriately can give clients a sense that the therapist is interested and competent in making sense
of their life situation, but used inappropriately it can create an inquisitorial, judgemental atmosphere. Skilled therapists balance the use of
nondirective exploration and direct elicitation.
Clarification is used to restructure what the client has said so that it makes some implicit belief, assumption, contradiction, inconsistency
or link between ideas, events and emotions clearer to the client. Here are some ways you can clarify. Ask the client to repeat a key phrase
or sentence that may highlight an assumption or inconsistency such as 'I left him because I wanted him near me.' Briefly paraphrase
and encapsulate key ideas, inconsistencies, or connections in a client's extensive monologue; for example, 'From your account of that
conversation, it sounds like you wanted him to support you, but you found yourself withdrawing from him.' Point out assumptions implicit
in what the client has said; for example, 'It seems that you may hold a belief that you should not ask for support because you may be rejected
and you might find this too hard to cope with.' Clarification is used in CBT to pinpoint negative automatic thoughts and assumptions, but
then the focus shifts to challenging the validity of these. In IPT, no attempt is made to challenge unhelpful beliefs, inconsistencies and
contradictions. Rather, they are simply brought to the client's attention.
Communication analysis is used to help clients identify communication failures and communicate more effectively. Ask clients to select
a specific conversation or dispute in which communication failure led to an unsuccessful outcome. Ask clients to reconstruct a verbatim
transcript of the conversation in the therapy session. Then ask clients to specify exactly what they hoped to achieve through having the

conversation, and what expectations and assumptions they had about the way their verbal and non-verbal communications would be
interpreted by the other person. From the account of the actual conversation and clients' intentions and assumptions, invite clients to
pinpoint one or more of the following communication failures: expecting others to know one's needs and wishes, such as needing support,
without them being explicitly stated; using indirect or nonverbal communication, such as sulking or self-harm, rather than direct verbal
confrontation to communicate complex messages such as 'I'm angry at you because you are not supporting me'; and failing to check
that one's understanding was accurate, for example misinterpreting the statement 'I'll be home late today' as meaning 'I don't like you
so I'm not coming home early' and then not checking the accuracy of this misinterpretation. When clients identify their communication
failures, help them develop ways to communicate their ideas directly and clearly and to check that they have accurately understood
others. Communication analysis is central to helping clients deal with role disputes. This is very similar to an individualised version of
communication training used in behavioural marital therapy, and to assertiveness training.
Encouragement of affect is central to IPT because many depressed clients have difficulty acknowledging, accepting, understanding and
regulating their emotions. Where clients are extremely emotionally constricted and are not aware that they may feel anger at the way
they are being punitively treated or affection in response to kindness shown to them by others, help these clients access and express their
emotions. Begin by pointing out that in their situation, specific feelings might be experienced by most people, but it is understandable
that such feelings would be suppressed if certain outcomes were feared. Where clients have strong sexual, aggressive or other socially
unacceptable emotions and feel guilt because of these, facilitate the acknowledgement, verbal expression and acceptance of these affects
within the therapy session. Let clients know that it is acceptable to experience these feelings and that having the feelings does not imply
that the client will be driven to act them out uncontrollably. Help clients regulate their emotions in ways that promote the achievement of
therapeutic goals. For example, clients who experience anger because of the uncaring way their partners treats them may use this anger as a
signal for them to act assertively rather than punish themselves for feeling angry. Such clients may be helped to let their partners know how
being treated unkindly hurts them and to ask their partners to treat them in kinder ways.


Use the therapeutic relationship to help clients understand other relationships. Explore clients' positive and negative beliefs,
expectations, emotions and behaviour within the therapeutic relationship. Take special care to give clients permission to voice negative
feelings and criticisms, however minor, and any possible distortions of the therapeutic relationship. Then draw parallels between the way
the client interprets and manages the therapeutic relationship and the way they manage other important relationships in their lives. Where
role disputes are a focus for therapy, use the therapeutic relationship to help clients see how their interactional style prevents them from
resolving differences and then help them develop new ways for doing so within the safety of the therapeutic relationship. Where grief and
loss are the focus of IPT, point out the client's tendency to emotionally cut themselves off from others or to develop relationships that mirror
the one with the lost person. Where difficulty making and maintaining relationships is the focus for IPT, help clients use the therapeutic
relationship as a model for developing other supportive relationships outside therapy. Many of the psychodynamic techniques in Chapter 4
can be used in IPT to encouraging the expression of affect and to help clients use the therapeutic relationship as a vehicle for change.
Behaviour change techniques include psychoeducation, decision analysis, and role-play. In psychoeducation, give clients information
about their condition, factors affecting it, and tried and tested ways of managing practical problems associated with it in a way that matches
their readiness and ability to understand it. With decision analysis, help clients systematically define their difficulties in solvable terms,
generate multiple solutions, explore the pros and cons of these, implement the most feasible solution and modify the solution in light of
progress or lack thereof. With role-playing, take the role of a significant person in the client's life and invite the client to use the exercise to
demonstrate their usual way of interacting and as a safe forum within which to rehearse alternative and more effective ways of interacting
with others. Role-playing may be used to help clients develop communication skills, assertiveness skills or skills for requesting support.
Disengagement
In brief IPT, as the final session approaches facilitate grieving the loss of the therapeutic relationship and the client's recognition of their
independent competence in managing depressive illness. If treatment has been ineffective, then acknowledge to the client that IPT was

ineffective, just as some antidepressants are ineffective. Frame this as a limitation of the treatment, not the client.
Maintenance IPT
Where clients have a history of three or more episodes of depression, offering monthly maintenance IPT is appropriate as there is good
evidence that this can prevent relapse. In maintenance therapy, invite clients at each session to review the current challenges in their lives.
Formulate and address these challenges in terms of grief, role disputes, role transitions, or skills deficits.
Integrative systemic couple therapy for depression
There is evidence from controlled trials for the effectiveness of three different couple-based approaches to the treatment of depression
(Whisman et al., 2012): systemic couple therapy (Jones & Asen, 1999), cognitive behavioural couple therapy (Beach et al., 2008) and
conjoint marital interpersonal therapy (Weissman et al., 2000). In this section an integrative systemic approach to couple therapy (ISCT)
for depression will be described which draws together key elements from these three empirically supported models of practice and which
is consistent with the model of practice described in Chapter 6 (Carr, 2012). Within ISCT it is assumed that in response to stressful life
events, psychosocially or biologically vulnerable individuals develop depression, and this comes to be maintained by repetitive patterns of
family interaction and associated belief systems (following the three-column model of problem formulation outlined in Chapter 6). The aim
of systemic couple therapy is to help couples understand these types of three-column formulations of episodes that strengthen depression
and exceptions to these situations, as illustrated in the case example that opened this chapter and the formulations in Figures 9.1 and 9.2. A
further aim of therapy is to help couples find new ways of dealing with depression that promote recovery and prevent relapse.
Planning and developing hypotheses
When a client in a marriage or long-term relationship is referred for treatment of depression, it is appropriate to invite the client and their

partner to attend an assessment session. The importance of the partner's perspective in giving a fuller account of the difficulties may be
offered as a rationale for this joint invitation. In planning what lines of questioning to follow when developing three-column formulations
in assessment interviews, a number of hypotheses deserve consideration. These are based on extensive research findings and clinical
experience (Beach et al., 2014; Carr, 2012; Gotlib & Hammen, 2014; Joiner & Coyne, 1999). What follows are useful hypotheses to consider
in cases of depression.
Behaviour patterns
Depression may be strengthened by behaviour patterns that represent unsuccessful attempted solutions for alleviating low mood or
depressive behaviour. In these behaviour patterns, couples may become entrenched in rigid roles of caregiving and care-receiving,
decomposition, criticism, abuse or mutual distancing.
Belief systems
Partners' roles in rigid behaviour patterns may be maintained by depressed clients' pessimistic beliefs about powerlessness to change
the situation and their partners' construing them as invalids, malingerers or nuisances to be avoided rather than 'good people with bad
problems'. Roles in depression-maintaining behaviour patterns may also be maintained by explicit or implicit beliefs that depression
involves some payoff such as preventing the family from breaking up; communicating to members of the extended family that they are
needed as carers; keeping alive the memory of a deceased family member whose death precipitated the depression; regulating the emotional
distance or level of intimacy between partners; regulating the power-balance within the marriage; providing the depressed person with a
break from the demands of ordinary life; or providing the depressed person with punishment for past wrongdoing.
Precipitating factors
Episodes of depression may be precipitated or exacerbated by major family lifecycle transitions such as births or bereavements, work-related
transitions such as redundancy, culture-related stress such as immigration or discrimination, health-related stresses such as diagnosis of

a major illness or infertility, or other environmental stresses such as major accidents or natural disasters. Where clients have had many
previous episodes of depression, minor stresses may precipitate catastrophic thinking that another episode of depression is about to happen,
and this may become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Once clients develop depression, referrals for treatment may be precipitated by the increased
demands clients place on their families or referrers or by the diminished capacity of families or referrers to cope because of some depletion
in the coping resources of families or referring agencies.
Predisposing constitutional, historical and contextual factors
Couples may become entrenched in rigid behaviour patterns and unhelpful belief systems that strengthen depression because of a
wide range of predisposing constitutional, historical and contextual factors. These include the presence of a family history and genetic
vulnerability to depression or a psychosocial vulnerability associated with early-life loss, trauma, abuse, deprivation or stress, or multiple
previous episodes of depression. Clients may also be vulnerable to depression because they have demographic characteristics associated
with marital difficulties and depression such as having high stress and low social support; being of lower socio-economic status; living in
urban areas; having married before the age of 20; having had a premarital pregnancy; living alone with young children; and being involved
in a relationship where partners are from different cultures with differing role expectations.
Protective factors
Exceptions to problematic behaviour patterns may be underpinned by resourceful belief systems and personal strengths. Exceptional
patterns probably involve clear communication, good problem solving, a degree of psychological intimacy and power sharing, and positive
and constructive beliefs about managing relationships. All of these resources may have their roots in positive early experiences, current
involvement in positive social networks, and positive demographic profiles. Similarity of cultural values and role expectations; high socio-
economic status; living in a rural area; good mental health; absence of parental divorce; absence of premarital pregnancy; and marriage
after the age of 30 have all been identified as key factors in positive demographic profiles associated with good adjustment in long-term


relationships. The lack of conflict over values associated with similarity of cultural background; the economic resources associated with
high socio-economic status; the community integration associated with rural living; the psychological resources associated with maturity;
and the model of marital stability offered by non-divorced parents are the more common explanations given for the associations among
these factors associated with relationship stability.
Assessment and formulation
Establish a contract for assessment in which it is clear that one to three sessions will be required to develop an understanding of the main
problems, suitability for treatment and treatment goals. Individuals who are able to construe couple therapy as an opportunity for making
a fresh start are more likely to benefit from treatment, so it is important to find an opportunity in the early sessions to convey this idea.
Engagement is a therapeutic priority during the assessment and when resistance occurs during treatment. Engagement involves developing
a relationship with clients within which they feel safe enough to explore new and challenging ways of understanding and managing
their lives. Adopt a collaborative, neutral, respectful, curious position. Leave both members of the couple with no doubt that both of their
viewpoints are respected as valid. Convey verbally and non-verbally that multiple perspectives on the problem can be safely explored within
the therapeutic context.
Begin by inviting partners to describe patterns of interaction that strengthen depression and into which they inadvertently fall. Explore
the beliefs that underpin their roles in these patterns and predisposing constitutional, historical and contextual factors that may underpin
these beliefs and roles. In a similar vein, enquire about exceptional circumstances that do not strengthen depression, and the beliefs and
predisposing strengths associated with these productive patterns of behaviour. Use the hypotheses listed in the previous section and the
questioning style described in Chapter 6 to inform this part of the assessment.
To help develop problem and solution formulations, explore the course of past episodes of depression, past episodes of successful and
unsuccessful treatment, the roles the couple and others played in these episodes, and the way they made sense of the course of depression

and its treatment. Explore the pattern of current family relationships and relationships in the couple's families of origin through genogram
construction as outlined in Chapter 6. Explore links between events and relationships across the family lifecycle and the course of the client's
depression and its treatment.
Once problem and exception formulations like those in Figures 9.1 and 9.2 have been developed, discuss the formulations with the
couple. Stress the couple's strengths in this feedback process to engender optimism. Match the level of detail in discussing the problem
and exception formulations to the couple's ability to understand them and their emotional readiness to accept them. Empathise with each
partner's position when outlining their roles in patterns that strengthen depression. Usually partners are well intentioned but under stress.
Without adequate information, they inadvertently contribute to these patterns. In light of this systemic understanding, invite couples to
set goals and select directions in which they would like to move to achieve these goals. Help couples set realistic achievable goals. In cases of
chronic or severe depression, invite partners to describe the minimal change that would be necessary for them to know that recovery had
started.
Treatment
Establish a contract for treatment specifying a limited number of sessions (up to 20) of set duration but variable spacing. Where one member
is housebound or hospitalised, at least some of the later sessions should be conducted on a routine outpatient basis rather than in hospital
or in the couple's home. It is also good practice to let the couple know that available evidence suggests two out of three couples benefit from
treatment as discussed in Chapter 6. Mention that in most couples in which one partner has been depressed, the difficulties that this causes
lead both partners to consider separation, and some couples separate once there is sign of recovery. For this reason, invite couples to make
a commitment to remain together for at least 6 months so they may have a chance to experience what it would be like to live together once
they have used therapy to remove the depression from their relationship. If therapy is unsuccessful (which it will be in a third of cases), or if
after 6 months either partner is still dissatisfied, then separation may be seriously addressed at that point.


In Chapter 6 a catalogue of many therapeutic techniques used in ISCT is given based on extensive reviews of theory, research and practice
of couple and family therapy (Carr, 2012). While all of these may be used in the treatment of couples overcoming depression, only techniques
that are of specific relevance to mood problems will be mentioned here, specifically:
• Scheduling conjoint pleasant events and routines;
• Externalising depression and building on exceptions;
• Enactment;
• Challenging rigid behaviour patterns;
Communication training;
• Problem-solving training;
• Creating partner support: remembering pleasant events;
• Creating partner support: compliments and statements of affection;
• Creating partner support: writing positive requests for the future;
Creating partner support: expressing attachment needs;
• Role reversal;
• Opening space for recovery and taking it slow.
Scheduling conjoint pleasant events and routines
Early in therapy, help couples become reactivated by listing and scheduling regular mutually pleasurable events. These may be graded in
demandingness and degree of activity involved. As therapy progresses, invite couples to gradually move from low activity non-demanding
tasks, like watching a sunset or reading to each other, to higher-activity tasks, like taking a 20-minute walk together each day or going for a

cycle. Physical exercise improves mood, so it is important for couples to work towards increasing physical activity over the course of therapy.
Often depression disrupts normal family routines such as times for retiring or waking, mealtimes, times for joint household chores and so
forth. Couples may be invited to reconstruct daily schedules and ensure that these include some joint physical activity and some joint periods
of supportive conversation and interaction, such as shared mealtimes.
Externalising depression and building on exceptions
From the outset, refer to depression as a problem distinct from the couple (White & Epston, 1990). Refer to it metaphorically as a negative
force in their lives that they must jointly defeat. Refer to the three-column problem formulation (like that in Figure 9.1) as a pattern that
strengthens depression. In contrast, refer to the exception formulation (like that in Figure 9.2) as a pattern that weakens depression. Ask
them to recount in detail multiple instances of exceptional episodes that weakened depression or helped them to defeat depression. Then
explore ways that such exceptional behaviour patterns might be reconstructed in the couple's day-to-day lives and ways positive belief
systems and strengths may be used. As homework assignments, invite couples to notice the conditions under which exceptions occur or to
recreate an exception. As they incorporate more exceptions into their lives that weaken the hold depression has on their relationship, invite
them to speculate about what this way of defining themselves says about them as a couple. Then invite them to imagine in the future what
their relationship might look like if there were many instances in which they managed to weaken depression.
Enactment
Enactment provides a concrete way of accurately identifying the point at which couples usually get stuck and creates opportunities for
exploring new and more effective alternatives for couples to manage their difficulties (Jones & Asen, 1999). Invite the couple to talk to each
other about a key issue, solve a problem, make a decision or offer support in their usual way. Then stop talking and leave time and space for
the couple to enact their usual routine. Decline invitations to participate in the couple's discussion during the enactment. Once the couple
becomes stuck and finds that they cannot make any further progress, challenge the rigid behaviour patterns in which the couple are stuck.

Challenging rigid behaviour patterns
Rigid behaviour patterns, particularly those that maintain depression, may be challenged during enactments and at other times using
disruption, unbalancing, intensification and boundary making. If one partner speaks far more than another, disrupt these monologues by
periodically inviting the less vocal partner to give their views on what has been said. With unbalancing, temporarily support one partner's
position by saying. For example with a couple who have difficulty with turn-taking you may say to the interrupted wife, 'You have great
patience allowing your partner to interrupt so often with such good grace. I'm inviting you to be less polite in future and to notice what
happens when you follow through without interruption.' With intensification, invite the couple to persist with a transaction for longer than
they normally would, to heighten the emotional tone of the exchange and so open up new possibilities for therapeutic change. For example,
you may say to a conflict-avoiding couple, 'Even though this discussion may be getting more heated than you would usually let it, I'm
inviting you now to keep going and notice if this helps you find a way forward.' Where the demands of parenting or connections with
partners' families of origin leave limited psychological space for the couple, boundary making is an intervention that challenges this state of
affairs. With boundary making, invite partners individually or jointly to regulate psychological space within the family so that each member
of the couple has enough personal space and there is also adequate space for their relationship. For example, where needs of children or
parents are always given higher priority than those of the couple, you may ask provocative metaphorical questions like these: 'Is there a way
that you could make these decisions together without taking directions from your children or your parents? Are you married to your mother
or your wife? Is your son your partner, or are you married to your husband?' Lessons learned from challenging rigid behaviour patterns
within sessions using these various techniques may be consolidated through homework assignments, such as practising turn-taking
without interruption for a set period of time each day; continuing a discussion of a specific emotionally laden topic beyond the usual
threshold of emotional comfort; or setting aside time each day when the couple can be together without interruption from children or

parents. Often challenging rigid behaviour patterns leads on to helping clients develop better communication and problem-solving skills
(Jacobson & Christensen, 1998). Let us recap communication and problem-solving skills that were previously mentioned in Chapter 6.
Communication training
Communication skills involve fair turn-taking; communicating messages clearly, directly and congruently; checking that one has been
understood; listening in an empathic manner; paraphrasing partners' messages; and checking the accuracy of such paraphrases. Clients'
attempts at clear communication may be hindered by making messages too complex or confusing, interrupting before the other person has
finished, not listening, failing to summarise what the other person said accurately, attributing negative malicious intentions to the other
person, failing to check that the message was accurately sent, failing to check that the message has been accurately received, blaming and
sulking.
Problem-solving training
Effective problem solving involves coaching couples to reframe large complex problems as a series of small solvable problems. Then for
each of these small problems, brainstorm multiple solutions; evaluate the pros and cons of each of these with an eye to past successful and
unsuccessful solutions; select the best solution; jointly implement it; review progress; and modify the selected solution if it is ineffective or
celebrate success if the problem is resolved. Common pitfalls include difficulties reframing big vague problems as small solvable problems;
attempting to solve more than one problem at a time; and evaluating the pros and cons of solutions before as many solutions as possible
have been listed. Couples may be invited to practise communication and problem-solving skills within and between sessions. As with all
homework assignments, agree a convenient time, place and duration for such exercises and design the assignment to maximise the chances
of success. Select relatively easy or emotionally undemanding topics as a focus for such tasks initially before progressing to more challenging
topics.

Creating partner support: remembering pleasant events
People with depression have over-general memories and tend to have difficulty recalling details of autobiographical episodes that might
improve their moods, and when they do remember details they tend to remember more negative than positive events. Non-depressed
partners may help their depressed partners use positive memories to improve their mood by regularly describing in detail pleasant events
that they have jointly experienced. In therapy and as a homework assignment invite couples to set aside 15 minutes a day to jointly
remember in detail a positive episode from their lives. This support-building strategy was used in the case example that opened this chapter.
Creating partner support: compliments and statements of affection
A common depression-maintaining interaction pattern involves the depressed person asking for reassurance (e.g. 'Do you think I'm OK?'),
the non-depressed partner offering this (e.g. 'Of course you're OK!'), and then the depressed partner discounting the reassurance (e.g. 'You're
only saying that to reassure me. You don't mean it.'). Coach non-depressed partners to refuse to offer reassurance or evaluative comments
on self-critical statements, since any response to such requests will be taken to be insincere and patronising. Instead, invite them to
identify situations when they can congruently compliment their partners for doing something specific well and link these compliments to
statements of affection. These statements take this form: 'Just now you did ABC. I like the way you did that. That reminds me of how much
I care about you.'
Creating partner support: writing positive requests for the future
Where partners have become embroiled in rigid, hostile or critical behaviour patterns, invite each member of the couple each day to write
down each thing their partner does to irritate them immediately without discussion. Ask each partner on their own in a private place each
evening, to review all of the criticisms and complaints that they have written down, but not spoken aloud, about their partner's behaviour
in the past day. Then, they should delete all criticisms that seem trivial. The remainder should be rewritten as positive requests about future
activity, rather than negative complaints about past behaviour. For example, 'I hated it when he was complaining about my watching the TV

during dinner' may be rewritten as 'I would love tomorrow to talk to you about how my day went during dinner.' All of this reviewing and
rewriting is done by each partner alone and privately. For the second part of the task, invite couples to set a fixed time each day to exchange
these letters and to respond to those requests within the letters to which they feel it is reasonable to respond within a day of receiving
the letter. However, ask couples not to discuss the contents of the letters between sessions since this may lead to them slipping back into
destructive behavioural patterns.
Creating partner support: expressing attachment needs
Where partners have developed rigid patterns involving expression of escalating anger towards each other, reframe this anger as an
expression of an underlying sense of distress, loss, sadness and fear that their partner will not meet their attachment needs (Johnson, 2004).
Invite each partner in turn to fully experience this sense of distress, loss and sadness, and tell their partner how much they need them and
long to be cared for by them.
Role reversal
Where couples are trapped in rigid caregiving and care-receiving cycles, their roles become so polarised that they may have difficulty
empathising with each other. As a result of this they may have difficulty experiencing the deepening intimacy that follows from empathy.
Role reversal is a way of helping couples appreciate and empathise with each other's polarised roles. Invite partners to swap roles. During the
exercise ask depressed partners to act completely rationally and assertively and non-symptomatic partners to fully express the sadness and
sense of loss that they have felt since the depression began to destroy the relationship. Partners may need coaching in acting out these role
reversals. Depressed partners may need help in practising assertive responses. Non-depressed partners may require help in expressing the
profound sense of loss they experience due to their partner's unavailability. If couples can sustain this reasonably effectively within therapy,
they may be invited to practise role reversal as a homework assignment.


Opening space for recovery and taking it slow
Rigid caregiving and care-receiving cycles may be disrupted by inviting the non-symptomatic partner to open up space for the depressed
partner to recover in by reducing the degree to which they carry out the depressed partner's household and other duties. This creates
opportunities for depressed partners to carry out these duties and show that they are recovering. To prevent depressed partners from feeling
overwhelmed by the number of opportunities to show signs of recovery, they may be invited to make haste slowly.
Pacing timing and ownership in therapy
While early sessions are spaced at weekly or fortnightly intervals, middle sessions may be more widely spaced. Encourage clients to take
responsibility for the spacing and pacing of sessions in the middle phase of therapy to fit with their growing sense of ownership of the
therapeutic process. While the agenda for early therapy sessions is determined in large part by the therapist, encourage clients to take
responsibility for setting the agenda as therapy progresses. Encourage clients to use sessions for reviewing in step-by-step detail how they
managed challenging situations in their day-to-day lives and how they contributed to positive and negative interaction patterns within
their relationships. Help clients to incorporate productive ways of managing challenges and positive interaction patterns into their future.
Encourage clients to take an active part in designing tasks to be completed between sessions that will help them amplify small positive
changes, movement towards goals and use of strengths.
Individual and family sessions
It may be appropriate to conduct occasional individual sessions with the depressed client to focus on personal aspects of coping with past
and present life stress. It may also be appropriate to include members of the extended family or the professional network in some sessions to
address ways in which they may contribute to supporting the couple.

Managing resistance
Clients may have difficulty cooperating because they lack energy or believe they are powerless to continue the battle with depression. In such
circumstances invite couples to take on tasks in therapy and homework assignments that are less demanding. Ambivalence about change
may interfere with couples' attempts to develop new ways of conducting their relationship. Help couples explore the downside to recovery
and the catastrophes that may be avoided by not achieving their therapeutic goals. Recovery may alter the distribution of power or the
amount of intimacy within relationships beyond tolerable levels. If these fears slow recovery, invite the couple to explore ways to tolerate
decreased power, increased autonomy, greater intimacy and so forth.
Disengagement
Regularly review progress towards goals, and once significant and sustained progress occurs, help clients understand how they used therapy
to resolve their difficulties. Anticipate situations that might lead to future relapses. Rehearse relapse prevention and management strategies.
These strategies will inevitably draw on their understanding of how they used therapy to recover from the current episode of depression.
Frame disengagement as the conclusion of an episode in a long-term relationship with a service rather than as the end of treatment, since
many mood disorders follow a chronic course.
Biomedical model
The biomedical model assumes that depression arises when people with a genetic vulnerability to mood dysregulation are exposed to
significant life stress, and depression may be alleviated through the use of psychoactive drugs or electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) (American
Psychiatric Association, 2001, 2010; Bazire, 2013; Bezchlibnyk-Butler et al., 2013; Lau et al., 2014; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2005;

Schatzberg et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2014; Thase et al., 2014). The genetic vulnerability to mood dysregulation is probably polygenetically
determined and may lead to a reduction in the efficiency with which messages are passed across synapses between neurons in centres of the
brain associated with mood regulation by specific neurotransmitters, notably serotonin and noradrenalin. Antidepressant drugs and ECT,
according to this model, alleviate depression by increasing the efficiency of the connections between neurons.
Four main classes of antidepressant medication have been developed: tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), monoamine oxidase inhibitors
(MAOIs), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and novel or dual-action antidepressants (Gitlin, 2014). TCAs such as imipramine
(trade name Tofranil) increase the sensitivity of dysfunctional receptor sites to serotonin and noradrenaline. MAOIs such as phenelzine
(trade name Nardil) prevent an enzyme (monoamine oxidase) from breaking down neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft and lead to
an increase in neurotransmitter levels. TCAs and MAOIs were developed in the 1950s and were widely used until the 1980s, when they
were largely replaced in clinical practice by SSRIs and novel or dual-action antidepressants. SSRIs like fluoxetine (trade name Prozac)
prevent serotonin from being reabsorbed into the presynaptic membrane and so increase levels of this neurotransmitter. Novel and dual-
action antidepressants operate in a variety of ways. For example venlafaxine (trade name Effexor), which is a dual-action antidepressant,
prevents both noradrenaline and serotonin from being reabsorbed into the presynaptic membrane and so increases levels of both of these
neurotransmitters. Results of meta-analyses of controlled trials show that for severe depression the positive effects of antidepressants are
substantial, but for mild or moderate depression their effects are negligible (Fournier et al., 2010). Furthermore, there is no evidence that the
newer antidepressants, such as the SSRIs, are any more effective than the older ones, such as the TCAs, although some have fewer side effects
(Gitlin, 2014).
There is controversy about the efficacy of ECT (Arscott, 1999; Johnstone, 2000; Read & Bentall, 2010), and it is unclear how it enhances
the efficiency of neurotransmitter functioning through inducing seizures (American Psychiatric Association, 2001; Royal College of
Psychiatrists, 2005).


Psychoeducation and fostering adherence to medication regime
In practice, multimodal programmes that include pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy are the treatments of choice for depression
(American Psychiatric Association, 2010; Craighead et al., 2007; Nemeroff & Schatzberg, 2007; NICE, 2009). With antidepressant treatment,
a low starting dose is prescribed, increased in a stepwise manner as side effects are tolerated with each increased dose, and assessed with the
expectation of reaching a therapeutic dose within 2 weeks and a therapeutic response within 6 weeks for about two-thirds of clients. Dosages
for commonly used antidepressants are given in Chapter 7 and elsewhere. Use the material in Box 9.1 for psychoeducation about depression
as the rationale for a multimodal programme. The psychologist and physician should work collaboratively to outline the medication regime
briefly and simply, to monitor side effects and to monitor adherence. Explain the side effects of antidepressants and how medication is
increased in a stepwise fashion as these side effects are tolerated until the recommended active dose is reached. Review adherence regularly
and respond favourably to adherence. Manage non-adherence by exploring obstacles to adherence and brainstorm ways of overcoming these
obstacles. Guidelines for increasing adherence are given in Chapter 7. Useful advice for clients on antidepressant medication is given in
David Burns's (1999) The Feeling Good Handbook and in the seventh edition of Paul Perry's (Perry et al., 2006) Psychotropic Drug Handbook. To
check for adverse effects, particularly when using high doses of antidepressants, electrocardiogram and plasma levels should be monitored.
Antidepressants should be continued for at least 6 months to reduce risk or relapse and then gradually withdrawn over 2-4 weeks to prevent
adverse effects, such as insomnia, anxiety and nausea associated with sudden withdrawal. For recurrent depression where three or more
episodes have occurred, pharmacotherapy may be prolonged indefinitely.
Selecting antidepressants
Currently the evidence suggests that all antidepressants are equally effective, and so decisions about which to use depend upon their profile
of adverse side effects, toxicity and cost, and on clients' individual reactions to them. Common side effects for TCAs and SSRIs include dry

mouth, visual accommodation difficulties, lethargy, and tachycardia or hypotension. Contraindications for use include cardiac difficulties
and pregnancy. TCAs are the most toxic class of antidepressants and lead to greatest harm following overdose, so are not recommended for
impulsive clients with suicidal ideation. Foods containing tyramine, such as cheese, cannot be taken when being treated with MAOIs due to a
hypertensive response and the risk of subarachnoid haemorrhage. MAOIs are not recommended for impulsive clients who cannot maintain
strict dietary control.
Managing non-response to antidepressants
Where no response to a multimodal programme involving antidepressant treatment and psychotherapy occurs, a second antidepressant of a
different class may be tried. If this is ineffective, an antidepressant may be augmented with lithium carbonate, a mood-stabilising drug used
for the treatment of bipolar disorder. Other pharmacological approaches to treatment-resistant depression are detailed in Chapter 7 and
elsewhere (American Psychiatric Association, 2010). ECT is recommended by mainstream psychiatric experts in the US and the UK for cases
of severe depression with somatic and psychotic features where there is no response to multimodal programmes involving psychotherapy
and aggressive pharmacotherapy (American Psychiatric Association, 2001; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2005). However, ECT has serious
side effects, notably memory loss; its mode of action is unknown; and there is limited evidence for its long-term effectiveness, so many
eminent psychologists are critical of its use on both ethical and empirical grounds (Arscott, 1999; Johnstone, 2000; Read & Bentall, 2010).
Summary
Depression is a syndrome associated with loss, involving low mood and disturbances of behaviour, relationships, somatic state, cognition
and perception. Suicidal ideation and self-destructive behaviour are common in depression. The lifetime prevalence rate for depression in
community studies ranges from 6-25%. Depression is twice as common in women as men, with most cases occurring in late adolescence
and early adulthood. Depression typically occurs when people who are genetically or psychosocially vulnerable due to early trauma or loss

are exposed to stressful life events, and the condition is maintained by a range of physiological, cognitive, behavioural and interpersonal
processes. Low stress and high levels of support are important protective factors in depression. The current treatment of choice is a
multimodal programme in which evidence-based psychological and pharmacological interventions are offered in combination. About one-
half to two-thirds of cases of acute depression recover after such programmes. Multimodal programmes are preferred because they are more
effective than unimodal programmes in leading to rapid improvement and relapse prevention. Evidence-based psychological therapies for
depression include CBT, IPT, and couple therapy. With CBT it is assumed that depression is maintained by depressive thinking and
behavioural styles. In CBT, through behavioural strategies, clients become reactivated before using cognitive strategies to alter depressive
thinking styles. Mindfulness-based meditation may be used to prevent relapse in recurrent depression. In IPT, where it is assumed that
depression is maintained by interpersonal factors and deficits, clients are helped to resolve complicated grief reactions, address role disputes
and role transitions, and compensate for social skill deficits that maintain their depression. In couple therapy, where it is assumed that
relationship factors are central to the maintenance of and recovery from depression, clients and their partners are helped to develop a more
supportive relationship and to jointly use a wide range of strategies to manage depression. Pharmacological interventions are based on the
assumption that depression is maintained by a reduction in the efficiency with which neurotransmitters such as serotonin and noradrenalin
transmit messages across synapses between neurons in circuits associated with mood regulation. Antidepressants, according to this model,
alleviate depression by increasing the efficiency of the connections between neurons.
Exercise
1. Working in pairs and using the case of Ruth described in the opening section of this chapter, role-play part of an individual session
with her. Ruth has begun by describing a number of events in the previous week about which she felt stressed, demoralised, and
inadequate. These included her car breaking down making her late for an appointment, believing she was overcharged at the garage

for the repair, forgetting to buy art supplies for one of her children and missing a parent-teacher meeting. Role-play work with Ruth on
using a thought record to catch and challenge negative automatic thoughts she had in these situations. After the role-play, identify three
positive aspects of the psychologist's work with Ruth. Pinpoint specific verbal and non-verbal behaviours that were helpful. Identify two
specific verbal and non-verbal behaviours that might improve the work. Role-play part of the session again with a view to practising
these two specific behaviours.
2. Working in pairs and using the case of Ruth discussed in this chapter, role-play part of an individual session with her.
1. Explain to Ruth the biopsychosocial model using a recent typical day that she described. Outline the various connections between
depressed behaviours, feelings, bodily sensations, and thoughts; that is, the 'vicious cycles' that have occurred. Give examples of
areas where you could work with her to break these vicious cycles.
2. Explain to Ruth the importance of noticing and monitoring thoughts and feelings. Collaboratively set homework around tracking
moods and events.
3. Explain the relationship between pleasant events and improving mood. Collaboratively set homework of activity scheduling.
4. Role-play delivering the instructions for the body scan meditation. Record yourself giving these instructions and listen back to the
recording.
3. Work in pairs, adopting roles of interviewer and interviewee; reverse roles when the interview is over. The interviewer should invite the
interviewee to describe a minor mood problem that he or she or had in the past week or two. Collaboratively formulate this minor mood
problem from a CBT, IPT or ISCT perspective, and work out with the interviewee a way to manage such minor mood problems in future
using CBT, IPT or ISCT treatment strategies.


Evidence summaries
American Psychiatric Association. (2010). Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with Major Depressive Disorder (Third Edition).
Arlington, VA: Author.
Craighead, W., Shets, E., Brosse, A., & Ilardi, S. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for major depressive disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman
(Eds.), A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 289-308). New York: Oxford University Press.
Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Andersson, G., & van Oppen, P. (2008). Psychotherapy for depression in adults: A meta-analysis of
comparative outcome studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 909-922.
Driessen, E., Cuijpers, P., de Maat, S., Abbass, A. A., de Jonghe, F., & Dekker, J. (2010). The efficacy of short-term psychodynamic
psychotherapy for depression: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 25-36.
Fournier, J., DeRubeis, R., Hollon, S., Dimidjian, S., Amsterdam, J., Shelton, R., & Fawcett, J. (2010). Antidepressant drug effects and
depression severity. The Journal of the American Medical Association, 303, 47-53.
Golden, T., Gaynes, B., Ekstrom, D., Hamer, R., Jacobsen, F., Suppes, T., … Nemeroff, C. (2005). The efficacy of light therapy in the
treatment of mood disorders: A review and meta-analysis of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 656-662.
Nemeroff, C. B., & Schatzberg, A. F. (2007). Pharmacological treatments for unipolar depression. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide
to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 271-288). New York: Oxford University Press.
NICE (2009). Depression: The treatment and management of depression in adults (update) (Clinical guideline 90). London: National
Institute of Clinical Excellence.


Further reading for practitioners
Arntz, A. (2013). Schema Therapy in Practice: An Introductory Guide to the Schema Mode Approach. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Beck, A., Rush, A., Shaw, B., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive Therapy of Depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New York: International University Press.
Beck, J. (2011). Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.
Beck, J. (2011). Cognitive Therapy for Challenging Problems: What To Do When the Basics Don't Work. New York: Guilford.
Edinger, J., & Carney, C. (2015). Overcoming Insomnia. A Cognitive Behavioural Therapy Approach (Second Edition). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gilbert, P. (2010). Compassion Focused Therapy: Distinctive Features. London: Routledge.
Gotlib, H., & Hammen, C. (2014). Handbook of Depression (Third Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Jobes, D. A. (2006). Managing Suicide Risk: A Collaborative Approach. New York: Guilford.
Jones, E., & Asen, E. (1999). Systemic Couple Therapy and Depression. London: Karnac.
McCullough, J. (2000). Treatment for Chronic Depression. New York: Guilford.
McCullough, J. (2001). Skills Training Manual for Diagnosing and Treating Chronic Depression: Cognitive Behavioural Analysis System of
Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford.
Moore, R., & Garland, A. (2003). Cognitive Therapy for Chronic and Persistent Depression. Chichester: Wiley.
Morin, C., & Espie, C. (2003). Insomnia: A Clinical Guide to Assessment and Treatment. New York: Kluwer. (Comes with CD).
Padesky, C., & Greenberger, D. (1995). Clinician's Guide to Mind over Mood. New York: Guilford.


Perlis, M., Junquist, C., Smith, M., & Posner, D. (2008). Cognitive Behavioural Treatment of Insomnia: A Session-By-Session Guide. New York:
Springer.
Persons, J., Davidson, J., & Tomkins, M. (2001). Essential Components of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Depression. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Rothschild, B. (2000). The Body Remembers: The Psychophysiology of Trauma and Trauma Treatment. New York: Norton.
Segal, Z., Williams. M., & Teasdale, J. (2013). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for Depression (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.
Weissman, M., Markowitz, J., & Klerman, G. (2000). Comprehensive Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
Weissman, M., Markowitz, J., & Klerman, G. (2007). Clinician's Quick Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Further reading for clients
Burns, D. (1999). Feeling Good. The New Mood Therapy. New York: Avon.
Burns, D. (1999). The Feeling Good Handbook (Revised Edition). New York: Plume.
Edinger, J., & Carney, C. (2015). Overcoming Insomnia. A Cognitive Behavioural Therapy Approach. Workbook (Second Edition). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Fennell, M. (2009). Overcoming Low Self-esteem: A Self-help Guide Using Cognitive Behavioural Techniques. London: Constable and
Robinson.
Gilbert, P. (2009). Overcoming Depression (Third Edition). London: Constable and Robinson.
Gilbert, P. (2013). The Compassionate Mind. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Greenberger, D., & Padesky, C. (1995). Mind over Mood: Changing How You Feel by Changing the Way You Think. New York: Guilford.


Kabat Zinn, J. (2012). Mindfulness for Beginners. Boulder, CO: Sounds True.
Knaus, W. (2012). The Cognitive Behavioural Workbook for Depression: A Step-by-Step Programme (Second Edition). Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger Publications.
Lewinsohn, P., Munoz, R., Youngren, M., & Zeiss, A. (1996). Control Your Depression. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
McCullough, J. (2002). Patient's Manual for CBASP. New York: Guilford.
Rosenthal, N. E. (2013). Winter Blues: Everything You Need to Know to Beat Seasonal Affective Disorder (Fourth Edition). New York: Guilford
Press.
Teasdale, J., Williams, M., & Segal, A. (2014). The Mindful Way Workbook: An 8-Week Program to Free Yourself from Depression and
Emotional Distress. New York: Guilford.
Weissman, M. (1995). Mastering Depression: A Patients Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Williams, M. G., Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z., & Kabat Zinn, J. (2007). The Mindful Way Through Depression: Freeing Yourself from Chronic
Unhappiness. New York: Guilford. (Includes CD of mindfulness exercises).
Assessment instruments
Bech, P., Stage, K., Nair, V., Larsen, J., Kragh-Sorensen, P., & Gjerris, A. (1997). The Major Depression Rating Scale (MDS). Inter-rater
reliability and validity across different settings randomized moclobemide trial. Journal of Affective Disorders, 42, 39-48.
Beck, A., & Steer, R. (1988). Beck Hopelessness Scale. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A., Steer, R., & Brown, G. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory-Second Edition (BDI-II). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.


Blackburn, I., Jones, S., & Lewin, R. (1986). Cognitive style in depression. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 25, 241-251. Contains
cognitive style test. Scale is on pp 95-100 of Williams, M. (1992). The Psychological Treatment of Depression (Second Edition). Routledge:
London.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Iannuzzo, R., Jaeger, J., Goldberg, J., Kafantaris, V., & Sublette, M. (2006). Development and reliability of the HAM-D/MADRS Interview: An
integrated depression symptom rating scale. Psychiatry Research, 145, 21-37. A structured interview that gives scores on the Hamilton
Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) and the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS).
Kiesler, D. (1987). Research Manual for the Impact Message Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologist Press.
Rosenbaum, M. (1980). A schedule for assessing self-control behaviours: Preliminary Findings. Behaviour Therapy, 11, 109-121.
Contains the Self-control Schedule.
Weissman, A., & Beck, AT. (1978). Development and validation of the Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale. Paper presented at AABT, Chicago.
Scale is on pp. 100-104 of Williams, M. (1992). The Psychological Treatment of Depression (Second Edition). Routledge: London.
Video training tapes
Davidson, J., Persons, J., & Tomkins, M. (2001). Cognitive-Behaviour Therapy for Depression Video Series of 5 Tapes. 1. Individualised Case
Formulation and Treatment Planning. 2. Activity Scheduling. 3. Using the Thought Record. 4. Schema Change Methods.5. Structure of the
Therapy Session. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Greenberg, L. (2006). Emotion-Focused Therapy for Depression (2 video set). APA Psychotherapy Video Series II. Specific Treatments for
Specific Populations. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.


Segal, Z. (2004). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for Depression. APA Psychotherapy Video Series IV. Spirituality. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Web-based resources for clients
Beyond Blue: http://www.beyondblue.org.au
E-couch: https://ecouch.anu.edu.au/welcome
E-hub Self-Help Programs for Mental Health and Wellbeing: http://www.ehub.anu.edu.au/welcome.php
The Mood Gym: https://moodgym.anu.edu.au/welcome/faq
References
Aldao, A., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Schweizer, S. (2010). Emotion-regulation strategies across psychopathology: A meta-analytic review.
Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 217-237.
American Psychiatric Association. (2001). Task Force Report of the APA on the Practice of Electroconvulsive Therapy Recommendations for
Treatment, Training, and Privileging (Second Edition). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2010). Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with Major Depressive Disorder (Third Edition).
Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA:
Author.


Andrews, G., Cuijpers, P., Craske, M. G., McEvoy, P., & Titov, N. (2010). Computer therapy for the anxiety and depressive disorders is
effective, acceptable and practical health care: A meta-analysis. PLoS ONE, 5(10). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0013196
Angst, J. (2009). Course and prognosis of mood disorders. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, & Geddes, J. (Eds.), New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry (Volume 1, Second Edition, pp. 665-669). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arscott, K. (1999). ECT: The facts psychiatry declines to mention. In C. Newnes, G. Holmes, & C. Dunn (Eds.), This Is Madness (pp. 97-118).
Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.
Bazire, S. (2013). The Psychotropic Drug Directory 2014: The Professionals' Pocket Handbook and Aide Memoire. Cheltenham: Lloyd-
Reinhold Communications.
Beach, S., Dreifuss, J., Franklin, K., Kamen, C., & Gabriel, B. (2008). Couple therapy and the treatment of depression. In A. Gurman (Ed.),
Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy (Fourth Edition, pp. 545-566). New York: Guilford.
Beach, S., Whisman, M., & Bodenmann, G. (2014). Couple, parenting, and interpersonal therapies for depression in adults: Toward
common clinical guidelines within a stress-generation framework. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression (Third
Edition, pp. 552-570). New York: Guilford Press.
Beck, A. (1976). Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New York: Meridian.
Beck, A. T., & Alford, B. (2009). Depression: Causes and Treatment (Second Edition). Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bezchlibnyk-Butler, K., Jeffries, J., Procyshyn, R.,. (2013). Clinical Handbook of Psychotropic Drugs (Twentieth Edition). New York: Hogrefe
Publishing.
Brent, D., & Weersing, R. (2008). Depressive disorders in childhood and adolescence. In M. Rutter, D. Bishop, D. Pine, S. Scott, J. Stevenson,
E. Taylor, & A. Thapar (Eds.), Rutter's Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (Fifth Edition, pp. 587-612). London: Blackwell.
Burns, D. (1999). The Feeling Good Handbook (Revised Edition). New York: Plume.


Butler, A., Chapman, J., Forman, E., & Beck, A. (2006). The empirical status of cognitive-behavioural therapy: A review of meta-analyses.
Clinical Psychology Review, 36, 17-31.
Carr, A. (2011). Positive Psychology. The Science of Happiness and Human Strengths (Second Edition). London: Routledge.
Carr, A. (2012). Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Practice (Third Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
Clark, D., & Beck, A. (2010). Cognitive theory and therapy of anxiety and depression: Convergence with neurobiological findings. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 418-424.
Clark, D., Beck, A., & Alford, B. (1999). Scientific Foundations of Cognitive Theory and Therapy for Depression. Chichester: Wiley.
Craighead, W., Shets, E., Brosse, A., & Ilardi, S. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for major depressive disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman
(Eds.), A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 289-308). New York: Oxford University Press.
Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Andersson, G., & van Oppen, P. (2008). Psychotherapy for depression in adults: A meta-analysis of
comparative outcome studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 909-922.
Dozier, M., Stovall-McClough, K., & Albus, K. (2008). Attachment and psychopathology in adulthood. In J. Cassidy & P. Shaver (Eds.),
Handbook of Attachment (Second Edition, pp. 718-744). New York: Guilford.
Driessen, E., Cuijpers, P., de Maat, S., Abbass, A. A., de Jonghe, F., & Dekker, J. (2010). The efficacy of short-term psychodynamic
psychotherapy for depression: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 25-36.
Edinger, J., & Carney, C. (2015). Overcoming Insomnia. A Cognitive Behavioural Therapy Approach (Second Edition). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Elder, B. L., & Mosack, V. (2011). Genetics of depression: An overview of the current science. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 32, 192-202.
Farmer, A., & McGuffin, P. (1989). The classification of depressions: Contemporary confusions revisited. British Journal of Psychiatry,
155, 437-443.


Ferrari, A. J., Somerville, A. J., Baxter, A. J., Norman, R., Patten, S. B., Vos, T., & Whiteford, H. A. (2013). Global variation in the prevalence
and incidence of major depressive disorder: A systematic review of the epidemiological literature. Psychological Medicine, 43, 471-481.
Fournier, J., DeRubeis, R., Hollon, S., Dimidjian, S., Amsterdam, J., Shelton, R., & Fawcett, J. (2010). Antidepressant drug effects and
depression severity. The Journal of the American Medical Association, 303, 47-53.
Garber, J. (2010). Vulnerability to depression in childhood and adolescence. In R. Ingram & J. Price (Eds.), Vulnerability to
Psychopathology. Risk Across the Lifespan (Second Edition, pp. 189-247). New York: Guilford Press.
Gilbert, P. (2009). Overcoming Depression (Third Edition). London: Constable and Robinson.
Gilbert, P. (2013). The Compassionate Mind. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Gitlin, M. (2014). Pharmacotherapy and other somatic treatments for depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of
Depression (Third Edition, pp. 492-512). New York: Guilford Press.
Golden, T., Gaynes, B., Ekstrom, D., Hamer, R., Jacobsen, F., Suppes, T., … Nemeroff, C. (2005). The efficacy of light therapy in the
treatment of mood disorders: A review and meta-analysis of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 656-662.
Goodman, S., & Lusby, C. (2014). Early adverse experiences and depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression
(Third Edition, pp. 220-239). New York: Guilford Press.
Gotlib, H., & Hammen, C. (2014). Handbook of Depression (Third Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Gotlib, I., & Joorman, J. (2010). Cognition and depression: Current status and future directions. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6,
285-312.
Greenberger, D., & Padesky, C. (1995). Mind over Mood: Changing How You Feel by Changing the Way You Think. New York: Guilford.
Gregory, R. J., Schwer Canning, S., Lee, T. W., & Wise, J. C. (2004). Cognitive bibliotherapy for depression: A meta-analysis. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 35, 275-280.


Hamilton, J., Furman, D., & Gotlib, I. (2012). The neural foundations of major depression: Classical approaches and new frontiers. In F. F.
Lopez-Munoz & C. Alamo (Eds.), Neurobiology of Depression (pp. 57-74). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Hammen, C., Bistricky, S., & Ingram, R. (2010). Vulnerability to depression in adulthood. In R. Ingram & J. Price. (Eds.), Vulnerability to
Psychopathology. Risk Across the Lifespan (Second Edition, pp. 248-281). New York: Guilford Press.
Hammen, C., & Shih, J. (2014). Depression and interpersonal processes. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression (Third
Edition, pp. 277-295). New York: Guilford Press.
Hawton, K., Comabella, C.C.I., Haw, C., & Saunders, K. (2013). Risk factors for suicide in individuals with depression: A systematic review.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 147, 17-28.
Hemmeter, U., Hemmeter-Spernal, J., & Krieg, J. (2010). Sleep deprivation in depression. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, 10, 1101-
1115.
Hilt, L., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2014). Gender differences in depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression (Third
Edition, pp. 355-373). New York: Guilford Press.
Hollon, S., Stewart, M., & Strunk, D. (2006). Enduring effects for cognitive behaviour therapy in the treatment of depression and anxiety.
Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 285-315.
Hölzel, L., Härter, M., Reese, C., & Kriston, L. (2011). Risk factors for chronic depression—A systematic review. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 129, 1-13.
Hoogenhout, E., van der Elst, W., de Groot, R., van Boxtel, M., & Jolles, J. (2010). The neurovegetative complaints questionnaire in the
Maastricht aging study: Psychometric properties and normative data. Aging & Mental Health, 14, 613-623.
Jacobson, N., & Christensen, A. (1998). Acceptance and Change: A Therapists Guide to Transforming Relationships. New York: Norton.
Jobes, D. A. (2006). Managing Suicide Risk: A Collaborative Approach. New York: Guilford.
Johnson, S. (2004). The Practice of Emotionally Focused Couple Therapy: Creating Connection (Second Edition). New York: Routledge.


Johnstone, L. (2000). Users and Abusers of Psychiatry (Second Edition). London: Routledge.
Joiner, T., & Coyne, J. (1999). The Interactional Nature of Depression. Washington, DC: APA.
Joiner, T. E., & Timmons, K. A. (2009). Depression in its interpersonal context. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression
(Second Edition, pp. 322-339). New York: Guilford Press.
Jones, E., & Asen, E. (1999). Systemic Couples Therapy for Depression. London: Karnac.
Joormann, J., & Arditte, K. (2014). Cognitive aspects of depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression (Third
Edition, pp. 220-239). New York: Guilford Press.
Judd, L. (1997). The clinical course of unipolar major depressive disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 54, 989-991.
Kampman, O., & Poutanen, O. (2011). Can onset and recovery in depression be predicted by temperament? A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Journal of Affective Disorders, 135, 20-27.
Kendell, R. (1976). The classification of depressions: A review of contemporary confusion. British Journal of Psychiatry, 129, 15-88.
Kessler, R., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K., & Walters, E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of
DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593-602.
Kessler, R., de Jonge, P., Shahly, V., van Loo, H., Wang, P., & Wilcox, M. (2014). Epidemiology of depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen
(Eds.), Handbook of Depression (Third Edition, pp. 7-24). New York: Guilford Press.
Kessler, R., & Wang, P. S. (2009). Epidemiology of depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (Second Edition,
pp. 5-22). New York: Guilford Press.
Kiesler, D. (1987). Research Manual for the Impact Message Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologist Press.
Klein, D., & Allmann, A. (2014). Course of depression: Persistence and recurrence. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of
Depression (Third Edition, pp. 64-83). New York: Guilford Press.

Klein, D. N., Durbin, C. E., & Shankman, S. A. (2009). Personality and mood disorders. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of
Depression (Second Edition, pp. 93-112). New York: Guilford Press.
Kotov, R., Gamez, W., Schmidt, F., & Watson, D. (2010). Linking "big" personality traits to anxiety, depressive, and substance use
disorders: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 768-821.
Lau, J., Lester, K., Hodgson, K., & Eley, T. (2014). Genetics of mood disorders. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression
(Third Edition, pp. 165-181). New York: Guilford Press.
Liu, R., & Alloy, L. (2010). Stress generation in depression: A systematic review of the empirical literature and recommendations for
future study. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 582-593.
Lopez-Munoz, F., & Alamo, C. (2012). Neurobiology of Depression. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Maletic, V., Robinson, M., Oakes, T., Iyengar, S., Ball, S., & Russell, J. (2007). Neurobiology of depression: An integrated view of key
findings. International Journal of Clinical Practice, 61, 2030-2040.
McCullough, J. (2000). Treatment for Chronic Depression. New York: Guilford.
McLaughlin, K., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2011). Rumination as a transdiagnostic factor in depression and anxiety. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 49, 186-193.
Monroe, S., & Harkness, K. (2005). Life stress, the "kindling" hypothesis, and the recurrence of depression: Considerations from a life
stress perspective. Psychological Review, 112, 417-445.
Monroe, S., Slavich, G., & Georgiades, K. (2014). The social environment and depression: the roles of life stress. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen
(Eds.), Handbook of Depression (Third Edition, pp. 296-314). New York: Guilford Press.
Monteleone, P., Martiadis, V., & Maj, M. (2011). Circadian rhythms and treatment implications in depression. Progress in Neuro-
Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 35, 1569-1574.
Morin, C., & Espie, C. (2003). Insomnia: A Clinical Guide to Assessment and Treatment. New York: Kluwer.


Nemeroff, C. B., & Schatzberg, A. F. (2007). Pharmacological treatments for unipolar depression. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide
to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 271-288). New York: Oxford University Press.
NICE (2009). Depression: The Treatment and Management of Depression in Adults (Update) (Clinical Guideline 90). London: National
Institute of Clinical Excellence.
Nock, M., Millner, A., Deming, C., & Glenn, C. (2014). Depression and suicide. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression
(Third Edition, pp. 448-468). New York: Guilford Press.
Pail, G., Huf, W., Pjrek, E., Winkler, D., Willeit, M., Praschak-Rieder, N., & Kasper, S. (2011). Bright-light therapy in the treatment of mood
disorders. Neuropsychobiology, 64, 152-162.
Parker, G. (2009). Diagnosis, classification and differential diagnosis of the mood disorders. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, &
Geddes, J. (Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry. (Volume 1, Second Edition, pp. 637-645). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Paykel, E., & Scott, J. (2009). Treatment of mood disorders. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, & Geddes, J. (Eds.), New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry. (Volume 1, Second Edition, pp. 6669-680). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perry, P., Alexander, B., Liskow, B., & DeVane, C. (2006). Psychotropic Drug Handbook (Eighth Edition). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott,
Williams and Wilkins.
Pizzagalli, D., & Treadway, M. (2014). Neuroimaging approaches to the study of major depressive disorder: regions to circuits. In H. Gotlib
& C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression (Third Edition, pp. 201-219). New York: Guilford Press.
Power, M. (2013). The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Mood Disorders (Second Edition). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Read, J., & Bentall, R. (2010). The effectiveness of electroconvulsive therapy: A literature review Epidemiologia e Psichiatria Sociale, 19,
333-347.
Richards, C., & O'Hara, M. (2014). Oxford Handbook of Depression and Co-Morbidity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Rosenthal, N. E. (2013). Winter Blues: Everything You Need to Know to Beat Seasonal Affective Disorder (Fourth Edition). New York: Guilford
Press.
Royal College of Psychiatrists. (2005). The ECT Handbook (Second Edition). The Third Report of the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Special
Committee on ECT (Council Report CR128). London: Royal College of Psychiatrists.
Schatzberg, A., Cole, J., & DeBattista, C. (2010). Manual of Clinical Psychopharmacology (Seventh Edition). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Press.
Segal, Z., Williams, M., & Teasdale, J. (2013). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy for Depression (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.
Sullivan, H. (1953). The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry. New York: Norton.
Taylor, D., Paton, C., & Kapur, S. (2014). The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in Psychiatry (Twelfth edition). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Thase, M., Hahn, C., & Berton, O. (2014). Neurobiological aspects of depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression
(Third Edition, pp. 182-201). New York: Guilford Press.
Ungar, M., Ghazinour, M., & Richter, J. (2013). Annual research review: What is resilience within the social ecology of human
development? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 348-366.
Weissman, M. (1995). Mastering Depression: A Patients Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Weissman, M., Markowitz, J., & Klerman, G. (2000). Comprehensive Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
Whisman, M., Johnson, D., Be, D., & Li, A. (2012). Couple-based interventions for depression. Couple and Family Psychology: Research and
Practice, 1, 185-198.
White, M., & Epston, D. (1990). Narrative Means to Therapeutic Ends. New York: Norton.
Wilkinson, P., & Goodyer, I. (2011). Childhood adversity and allostatic overload of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis: A
vulnerability model for depressive disorders. Development and Psychopathology, 23, 1017-1037.

World Health Organization. (1993). The ICD 10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva: Author.


Chapter 10 Bipolar disorder
Steve Jones, Dominic Lam and Elizabeth Tyler
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-10
Case example
Sarah is a 38-year-old woman with a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. She reported a difficult childhood with a mother who struggled with low
mood. Her parents separated when she was 10 years old, and she was raised by her mother with very little contact with her father. At initial
assessment she described feeling very different from her peers at school and often felt lonely and isolated. She experienced some bullying
and by the age of 14 she was regularly skipping classes. She left school at 16 with very few qualifications and began working as a waitress in
a local restaurant. It was here that she began to form friendships and described feeling accepted and liked for the first time.
Sarah was diagnosed with bipolar disorder at the age of 27 after being hospitalised for a manic episode. Prior to this she had recently
moved down to London to live with some friends. She had been experimenting with a number of substances such as cocaine, ecstasy and
acid (LSD), and was a regular user of cannabis and alcohol. During the next 3 years Sarah experienced a number of episodes of both mania
and depression. She had various jobs such as waitressing and bar work. However, she struggled to maintain a stable income and at one point

became homeless. After a year and a half of living in both squat houses and on the street, Sarah re-contacted her mother and asked if she
could move back to the family home. Sarah moved back to the north of England where she was referred to a community mental health team
and received support from her care coordinator – a community psychiatric nurse (CPN). Sarah and her CPN worked together to develop an
early warning sign and coping plan which she found useful at times. However she still was experiencing fluctuations in her mood and was
worried about experiencing an acute episode again. Sarah had taken up a job in a local chain restaurant in the neighbouring town and was on
track for a promotion to management.
When Sarah arrived at therapy she already had acquired some knowledge about her bipolar experiences due to the work she had carried
out with her CPN. However, the early warning sign and coping plan developed with her CPN was very medically focused. Coping strategies
included taking more medication and calling the psychiatrist. There were still periods of time where she experienced fluctuations in her
mood, which worried her. There were also other areas of her life that she did not feel happy with, in particular her ability to form new
relationships.
She was currently single and her last relationship was 3 years ago. She felt that her past episodes of bipolar disorder had made it difficult
for her to maintain a stable relationship. She had gained 2 stone in weight and this made her feel unattractive and low in confidence. She
had previously been a very active person who enjoyed going to the gym and being involved in local community arts projects. However, since
moving back to her home town she had not pursued any of her previous interests.
Clinical features
Bipolar disorder is characterised by episodes of mania or hypomania and depression. Much of the clinical research on bipolar disorder has
been based on cases diagnosed using criteria in DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) and these criteria will therefore be
described in this chapter. It is of note that these criteria have recently been updated in DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

Where these changes significantly impact on criteria, this is highlighted in the text. Diagnostic criteria for bipolar disorder from DSM-5 and
ICD-10 are given in Table 10.1. Depression in bipolar disorder has the same diagnostic criteria as in unipolar major depression. These criteria
are given in Table 9.1 in Chapter 9. The client has to have five (or more) of the following symptoms present during the same 2-week period
and these symptoms must represent a change from previous functioning: depressed mood, marked diminished interest or pleasure,
significant weight loss when not dieting (or weight gain) or decrease or increase in appetite, insomnia or hypersomnia, psychomotor
agitation or retardation, loss of energy, feelings of worthlessness or excessive guilt, impaired concentration or indecisiveness, recurrent
thoughts of death or recurrent suicidal ideation. These symptoms have to be present most of the day and nearly every day. At least one of the
symptoms has to be either depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure. In contrast, the DSM-IV-TR criteria for mania are a distinct period
of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive or irritable mood, lasting for 1 week (DSM-5 requires the presence of increased energy or
activity alongside any of these mood symptoms). During the period of mood disturbance, three (or more) of the following have to be present
to a significant degree: inflated self-esteem or grandiosity, decreased need for sleep (e.g. feeling rested after only 3 hours of sleep), more
talkative than usual or pressure of speech, flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing, distractibility, increase in goal-
directed activity or psychomotor agitation, and excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high potential for painful
consequences. One of the symptoms has to be either inflated self-esteem or irritability. If irritability is the persistent mood, then four other
symptoms have to be present. For a hypomanic episode, the criteria are similar to a manic episode with the exception that the duration is at
least 4 days. If an episode lasts at least a week and is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupational functioning,
then it is classified as hypomania, not mania. If there are psychotic features or the client has to be admitted to hospital, the episode is
classified as mania, not hypomania.
For a mixed episode, the criteria for both a manic episode and for a major depressive episode have to be fulfilled nearly every day for at
least a 2-week period. Furthermore, the mood disturbance has to be sufficiently severe to cause marked social or occupational impairment
or the episode necessitates hospitalisation to prevent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features. Mixed bipolar episodes are

rare according to DSM-IV-TR criteria. In DSM-5 there is no longer a specific diagnostic subcategory of mixed episode. Instead, DSM-5 makes
provision for a mixed specifier, which can be applied to either manic or depressive episodes. A mixed specifier can be added to manic or
hypomanic episodes when at least three depressive symptoms are experienced during the episode. Conversely, the mixed specifier can be
added to a depressive episode when at least three manic/hypomanic symptoms are present during the episode. Rapid cycling is defined as at
least four episodes of a mood disturbance in the previous 12 months that meet criteria for a major depression, manic, mixed or hypomanic
episode. There are two main subtypes for bipolar disorder. For clients to suffer from bipolar I disorder, there has to be at least one manic
episode or mixed episode and one major depressive episode. For clients to suffer from bipolar II disorder, there has to be at least one
hypomanic episode and one major depressive episode but no manic or mixed episodes.
Table 10.1 Diagnostic guidelines for bipolar disorder
DSM-5
ICD-10
Bipolar I Disorder. At least one manic episode. Manic and
depressive episodes are not better explained by another
disorder (e.g. a schizophrenia spectrum disorder). Bipolar
II Disorder. One or more episodes of both hypomania and
depression, but no manic episodes, which together cause
clinically significant distress or functional impairment.
Episodes are not better explained by another disorder (e.g. a
schizophrenia spectrum disorder). Manic Episode
Bipolar disorder is characterized by repeated (i.e. at least two) episodes
in which the patient's mood and activity levels are significantly
disturbed, this disturbance consisting on some occasions of an
elevation of mood and increased energy and activity (mania or
hypomania), and on others of a lowering of mood and decreased
energy and activity (depression). Characteristically, recovery is
usually complete between episodes, and the incidence in the two sexes
is more nearly equal than in other mood disorders. As patients who
suffer only from repeated episodes of mania are comparatively rare,

a. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated,
expansive or irritable mood and abnormally and
persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy
lasting at least a week and present most of the day, nearly
every day (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary).
b. During the period of mood disturbance and increased
energy or activity, 3 (or more) of the following symptoms
(4 if the mood is only irritable) are present to a significant
degree and represent a noticeable change from usual
behaviour:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
2. Decreased need for sleep
3. More talkative than usual or pressured speech
4. Flight of ideas or racing thoughts
5. Distractibility
6. Increased goal-directed activity or psychomotor
agitation
and resemble (in their family history, premorbid personality, age of
onset and long-term prognosis) those who also have at least
occasional episodes of depression, such patients are classified as
bipolar. Manic episodes usually begin abruptly and last for between 2
weeks and 4-5 months (median duration about 4 months).
Depressions tend to last longer (median length about 6 months),
though rarely for more than a year, except in the elderly. Episodes of
both kinds often follow stressful life events or other mental trauma,
but the presence of such stress is not essential for the diagnosis. The
first episode may occur at any age. The frequency of episodes and the
pattern of remissions and relapses are both very variable, though
remissions tend to get shorter as time goes on and depressions to
become commoner and longer lasting after middle age. Manic episode
Distinctions are made between hypomania, mania and mania with
psychotic symptoms, mixed episodes and depressive episodes
(described in Table 9.1). Mania. Mood is elevated out of keeping with
the individual's circumstances and may vary from carefree joviality to
almost uncontrollable excitement. Elation is accompanied by
increased energy, resulting in overactivity, pressure of speech and a
decreased need for sleep. Normal social inhibitions are lost, attention
cannot be sustained and there is often marked distractibility. Self-
esteem is inflated, and grandiose or over-optimistic ideas are freely
expressed. Perceptual disorders may occur, such as the appreciation of
colours as especially vivid (and usually beautiful), a preoccupation

7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high
potential for painful consequences (e.g. buying sprees
or sexual indiscretion)
c. Causes functional impairment or leads to hospitalization
to prevent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic
features.
d. Not due to the physiological effects of a substance, or
a medical condition (although may be precipitated by
antidepressants or ECT).
Hypomanic Episode
with fine details of surfaces or textures and subjective hyperacusis.
The individual may embark on extravagant and impractical schemes,
spend money recklessly, or become aggressive, amorous or facetious
in inappropriate circumstances. In some manic episodes the mood is
irritable and suspicious rather than elated. The first attack occurs
most commonly between the ages of 15 and 30 years, but may occur at
any age. The episode should last for at least 1 week and should be
severe enough to disrupt ordinary work and social activities more or
less completely. The mood change should be accompanied by
increased energy and several of the symptoms referred to above
(particularly pressure of speech, decreased need for sleep, grandiosity
and excessive optimism). Hypomania. Hypomania is a lesser degree
of mania, in which abnormalities of mood and behaviour are too
persistent and marked to be included under cyclothymia but are not
a. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, accompanied by hallucinations or delusions. There is a persistent mild
expansive or irritable mood and abnormally and
persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy
lasting at least 4 consecutive days and present most of the
day, nearly every day.
b. During the period of mood disturbance and increased
energy or activity, 3 (or more) of the following symptoms
(4 if the mood is only irritable) are present to a significant
elevation of mood (for at least several days on end), increased energy
and activity, and usually marked feelings of well-being and both
physical and mental efficiency. Increased sociability, talkativeness,
overfamiliarity, increased sexual energy and a decreased need for
sleep are often present, but not to the extent that they lead to severe
disruption of work or result in social rejection. Irritability, conceit and
boorish behaviour may take the place of the more usual euphoric
sociability. Concentration and attention may be impaired, thus
diminishing the ability to settle down to work or to relaxation and

degree and represent a noticeable change from usual
behaviour and have been present to a significant degree:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
2. Decreased need for sleep
3. More talkative than usual or pressured speech
4. Flight of ideas or racing thoughts
5. Distractibility
6. Increased goal-directed activity or psychomotor
agitation
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high
potential for painful consequences (e.g. buying sprees
or sexual indiscretion)
c. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change
in functioning that is uncharacteristic of the individual
when not symptomatic.
d. The mood disturbance and change in functioning is
observed by others.
leisure, but this may not prevent the appearance of interests in quite
new ventures and activities, or mild overspending. Hypomania covers
the range of disorders of mood and level of activities between
cyclothymia and mania. The increased activity and restlessness (and
often weight loss) must be distinguished from the same symptoms
occurring in hyperthyroidism and anorexia nervosa; early states of
'agitated depression' may bear a superficial resemblance to
hypomania of the irritable variety. Mania with psychotic symptoms.
The clinical picture is that of a more severe form of mania as described
above. Inflated self-esteem and grandiose ideas may develop into
delusions, and irritability and suspiciousness into delusions of
persecution. In severe cases, grandiose or religious delusions of
identity or role may be prominent, and flight of ideas and pressure of
speech may result in the individual becoming incomprehensible.
Severe and sustained physical activity and excitement may result in
aggression or violence, and neglect of eating, drinking and personal
hygiene may result in dangerous states of dehydration and self-
neglect. One of the commonest problems is differentiation of this
disorder from schizophrenia, particularly if the stages of development
through hypomania have been missed and the patient is seen only at
the height of the illness when widespread delusions,
e. Does not cause marked functional impairment, psychotic incomprehensible speech and violent excitement may obscure the
features or hospitalization.
basic disturbance of affect. Patients with mania that is responding to
neuroleptic medication may present a similar diagnostic problem at

f. Not due to the physiological effects of a substance, or
a medical condition (although may be precipitated by
antidepressants or ECT). Criteria for a depressive episode
are given in Table 9.1.
the stage when they have returned to normal levels of physical and
mental activity but still have delusions or hallucinations. Mixed
episode. Although the most typical form of bipolar disorder consists
of alternating manic and depressive episodes separated by periods of
normal mood, it is not uncommon for depressive mood to be
accompanied for days or weeks on end by overactivity and pressure of
speech, or for a manic mood and grandiosity to be accompanied by
agitation and loss of energy and libido. Depressive symptoms and
symptoms of hypomania or mania may also alternate rapidly, from
day to day or even from hour to hour.
Note: The DSM-5 (APA, 2013) diagnostic guidelines are given above, not diagnostic criteria. ICD-10 guidelines are adapted from ICD-10 (WHO, 1992).

Epidemiology
Bipolar disorder is relatively common. Prevalence studies in the UK, continental Europe and the US indicate a prevalence rate of 1-1.9% of
clients meeting formal diagnostic criteria for bipolar disorder (Bebbington & Ramana, 1995; Merikangas et al., 2007; Ten Have et al., 2002;
Weissman et al., 1988). Angst and colleagues have argued that in fact current diagnostic criteria for bipolar disorder incorrectly exclude
people with illnesses that fit within a bipolar spectrum; when these clients are included, prevalence rates increase to around 11% (Angst
et al., 2003). This would include clients who experienced symptoms of euphoria, overactivity and irritability for shorter periods than in
current DSM-IV-TR criteria, but who exhibited a significant change in functioning. In addition to this being a relatively common mental
health problem, by no means are all people meeting criteria for bipolar disorder involved in psychiatric services. Ten Have and colleagues


reported that in their population-based prevalence study, 25.5% of clients with bipolar disorder had never sought any form of professional
help (Ten Have et al., 2002).
Historically bipolar disorder was seen as being characterised by periods of mania and depression interspersed with periods of 'normality'.
Contrary to this view, Judd and others have conducted a series of long-term follow-up studies in which individuals with bipolar I and
II disorders spend 32-50% of time between episodes experiencing significant mood symptoms, primarily depression-related (Judd et al.,
2002, 2003; Post et al., 2003). Such subsyndromal symptoms are associated with increased problems in functioning and interpersonal
relationships and increased risk of future relapses (Judd et al., 2002; Morriss et al., 2013). Furthermore, there is evidence that, if anything,
the course of bipolar disorder can become more severe with age (Goodwin & Jamison, 1990). Clients later on in the illness course require only
relatively modest external stressors to trigger a mood episode (Ambelas, 1987; Post et al., 1986). There are consequently reductions in inter-
episode periods with increasing age (Kessing et al., 2004).
Bipolar disorder is associated with high risk of self-harm and suicide. Tondo et al. (2003) in a review reported an annual rate of suicide
in bipolar clients of 0.4%, which is 20 times higher than in the general population. A 34- to 38-year follow-up study of people with bipolar
disorder reported a 12-fold increase in successful suicide attempts, which although somewhat lower than that found by Tondo et al. (2003)
still represents a substantially elevated risk (Angst et al., 2002). Estimates vary for rates of suicide attempts. Thirty-four percent of bipolar
clients within the Stanley Bipolar Research Network were found to have a history of suicide attempts (Leverich et al., 2003), whilst a Dutch
study found that 20% of its bipolar sample had attempted suicide and 59% experienced suicidal ideation (Ten Have et al., 2002). Risk of
completed suicide is also higher for people meeting criteria for bipolar disorder with recent service contacts than for those who meet criteria
for other forms of severe mental health problem (Clements et al., 2013).
Family studies consistently estimate a higher morbid risk for relatives of bipolar clients to develop the disorder than the general
population (Baldessarini et al., 2012), ranging from 2-10 times increased risk (Craddock & Jones, 2001; Gershon et al., 1989). It is of note
that figures for increased depression in family members are substantially higher than those for bipolar disorder (Craddock & Jones, 2001;

Goodwin & Jamison, 1990). A large twin study by McGuffin and colleagues (2003) estimated 85% heritability for bipolar disorder. They
found that most of the genetic liability to mania is specific to the manic syndrome even though there are substantial genetic and non-shared
environmental correlations between mania and depression. It is, however, worth noting that the concept of heritability can be problematic.
There is an assumption that high heritability means that a particular outcome is genetically predetermined and that findings can be readily
generalised across samples. This is not the case, because heritability estimates are based on the assumption that environment and genes do
not interact, which is rarely true (Joseph, 2003; Visscher et al., 2008).
There are a number of comorbid conditions, especially personality, substance use and anxiety disorders, that need to be considered with
respect to bipolar disorder.

Personality disorders
Personality disorders have been estimated to occur in 10-13% of community samples (Samuels, 2011; Weissman, 1993). A replication of the
National Comorbidity Survey in US based on a community sample of 5,692 adults reported an odds ratio of 9.8 for risk of any personality
disorder in participants with bipolar disorder, with figures particularly elevated for the presence of comorbid antisocial or borderline
personality disorder (Lenzenweger et al., 2007). The presence of a personality disorder has been associated with more severe residual mood
symptoms in adults (George et al., 2003) and adolescents (Kutcher et al., 1990).

Substance misuse
The US Epidemiological Catchment Area study reported that 61% of clients with bipolar I disorder also met lifetime criteria for substance
use disorders (Regier et al., 1990). High rates of substance use disorders among those with bipolar disorder have been reported in numerous
studies across a range of different populations in different countries (Cassidy et al., 2001; Strakowski & DelBello, 2000). The recent updated

NICE guidelines for bipolar disorder reported a lower but still elevated substance use disorder rate of 40% in people meeting criteria for
bipolar I or II disorders (NICE, 2014).
Anxiety
Many people who live with bipolar disorder also experience significant anxiety symptoms. Lifetime anxiety disorders have been reported in
93% and concurrent anxiety disorders in 32% of individuals with bipolar disorder (McIntyre et al., 2006; Otto et al., 2006). The presence of
comorbid anxiety is associated with a range of issues including poorer treatment response and greater risk of further episodes of mania and
depression (Feske et al., 2000; Rucci et al., 2002). These findings have led Provencher et al. (2011), among others, to call for the development
of psychological approaches to addressing anxiety in the context of bipolar disorder. A current trial by our team is therefore evaluating the
benefits of delivering an integrated CBT intervention for both bipolar disorder and anxiety (Jones et al., 2013).
Comorbid personality disorders, alcohol and drug problems, and anxiety disorders are all associated with poorer therapeutic outcomes,
potential difficulties with therapeutic engagement, higher levels of symptomatology and more frequent hospitalisations. Each of these
issues can also elevate risks of self-harming and suicidal behaviours.
In addition to consideration of the role of comorbid conditions, there is also the issue of distinguishing bipolar disorder from other
disorders, especially schizoaffective disorder. Structured interview approaches indicate that it is possible to reliably diagnose bipolar I
and bipolar II disorders (Andreasen et al., 1981; Rice et al., 1992; Simpson et al., 2002). The main diagnosis that overlaps significantly
with bipolar disorder is schizoaffective disorder. With DSM diagnostic criteria, psychotic symptoms can occur in extremes of mania or
depression. The difference between psychotic symptoms associated with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia-spectrum diagnoses, such as
schizoaffective disorder, is that in bipolar disorder psychotic symptoms abate when mood symptoms resolve. Some diagnostic confusion can
occur when the bipolar disorder is chronic, as the psychotic symptoms may then appear to be persistent.

Assessment
A comprehensive assessment is a prerequisite for therapy. There is also an interaction between assessment and therapy processes. In many cases, the information drawn together through a proper assessment will provide the client with their first opportunity to understand the relationships between experiences, emotions and behaviour, often previously recalled as separate events. This alone will potentially be therapeutic, as well as enhancing engagement with the therapeutic process. Also, although much of the assessment will occur early in therapy, there will be times later in therapy when opportunities to acquire additional information may occur, such as through meetings with third parties. This interaction between therapy and assessment is a characteristic of successful therapy with bipolar clients.
Individual and family history
The assessment process should begin with an interview designed to elicit information about the history of the individual and their family. We know from research that many people with bipolar disorder will have other family members who present with affective disorders of various types. Where there has been affective disorder amongst the client's parents, this may have caused disruption during the client's development due to parenting style being affected by mood. For example, when the affected parent was depressed, they may have been more cold and critical, and when they were high, they may have been less responsible with their financial affairs or less involved with their children. Identifying this, and their perception of its impact on the client's life, is an important part of assessment. In general, as with other forms of cognitive therapy, the aim of history taking is to get a sense of how the individual has come to his or her own particular beliefs about the world, self and others.
Mental health history is also a crucial part of assessment. Many clients will have experience with psychiatric interviews and may not immediately see the relevance of reviewing this area. The key difference for a psychological assessment is that you are working with

the client to identify their own perception of mood fluctuations, whether or not these amounted to 'psychiatric symptoms' at the time.
Once information concerning mood change is collected, it is helpful to lay it out chronologically on a life chart, on which is also included
information about life events, medication, education and occupation. The development of a life chart, drawn up collaboratively with the
client, may show interrelationships between mood and other important factors. It can provide an important summary of key episodes.
It may also help clients look for patterns of illness, stresses, educational and occupational achievements. This information also serves to
illustrate that mood change often occurs within a context rather than being an event that occurs out of the blue. Furthermore, by linking
medication, mood, episodes and academic/occupational/personal achievements, clients are helped to see that all these factors are linked and
have potentially important roles in helping clients to manage their bipolar disorder. Life charts can help to provide evidence for which of
these elements are most important in influencing clients' mood and in achieving better occupational and social functioning.
A life chart for Sarah, the subject of the case study at the start of this chapter, is presented in Figure 10.1. This life chart illustrates
significant mood variability prior to Sarah's first diagnosed manic episode. It also demonstrates how changes in her mood appear to have
been associated with a number of life events and stresses.


M
+10
d
+5
f
Bullied at
school
New job -
started
making
friends
Moved to London,
experimenting with
drugs, chaotic
lifestyle, homeless
First manic
episode
10
15
20
25
-5
Home
life
difficult
n
g
-10
Left
school
30
Met new
boyfriend
35
40
Move
back
home
Age (Years)
End of
relationship

Figure 10.1 Life chart for Sarah showing self-rated mood over time
Note: Values between -5 and +5 are regarded as normal. Higher or lower values than this signify clinical mood disturbance.
A further important issue is that clients will have views about both medication and diagnosis. Clients will often have mixed feelings
about the medication that they have been prescribed. Considering these views and feelings in relation to the life chart can prove a useful
introduction to later sessions at which adherence issues are discussed. Clients will also vary in their views of their diagnosis, and exploring
this may be an important factor. Some people will feel that their diagnosis is helpful to explain and validate their mood experiences and may
provide a pathway to appropriate treatment. In contrast, other clients will believe that the diagnosis is a label that they do not accept, as it
is associated with stigma and a loss of identity. In both cases awareness of the client's perception will be key to the development of shared
therapy goals and avoiding harmful conflicts within therapy.
Other areas which assessment can usefully address include current mood state, initial information on coping with early warning signs of
the onset of manic or depressive episodes, levels of dysfunctional beliefs and experience of stigma. In addition, given the patterns of self-
harm and suicide risk associated with bipolar disorder, it is important to assess hopelessness and suicidality during a preliminary evaluation
and subsequently. Information can also be obtained on the resources at the individual's disposal, both in terms of social skills and sources of
professional and informal support. All of this information can be helpful in understanding each client's experience of personal recovery and
quality of life. For each of these areas, it important to use careful questioning within the assessment interview. However, it is usually helpful
to combine this with self-report and observer-rated measures to provide a comprehensive picture. Useful measures are considered next.
Self-monitoring
During assessment it is explained that self-monitoring is an important part of treatment. It is emphasised that a lot of the important aspects
of therapy will happen between sessions, and having information about how the client is feeling and what they are doing between sessions is

important in ensuring that they achieve the best possible outcome for the intervention. Initially clients will complete brief mood measures.
As therapy proper progresses, monitoring of activities, mood and thoughts becomes increasingly important.
Standardised measures
There are a number of measures that we have found helpful in initial and ongoing assessment during therapy. These will be discussed in
turn. In each case the information from these measures is used in combination with information from assessment and questioning of the
client regarding the issue under consideration.
Current mood state measures
• Beck Depression Inventory (Second Edition) (BDI-II; Beck & Steer, 1987; Beck et al., 1996). This is a 21-item self-report inventory that
assesses symptoms of depression. Total score cut-offs are: 0-13 (normal/minimal depression), 14-19 (mild depression), 20-28 (moderate
depression) and >29 (severe depression).
The Beck Hopelessness Scale (BHS; Beck & Steer, 1988). This is a 20-item self-report measure. Beck reported that scores of 9 or above
were significantly predictive of eventual suicide in individuals with suicidal ideas followed up over up to 10 years (Beck et al., 1985). Score
ranges are: 0-3 (normal), 4-8 (mild), 9-14 (moderate) and > 14 (severe).
• The Internal States Scale (ISS; Bauer et al., 1991, 2000). On this instrument clients use visual analogue scales to rate 16 different internal
states covering perceived conflict, activation, well-being, depression and global bipolar.
• The Altman Self-Rating Mania Scale (ASRM; Altman et al., 1994). This is a self-report questionnaire for measuring manic symptoms. It
consists of five groups of five statements. Clients are required to read each group of statements and choose one statement from each group
that describes the way they have been feeling for the past week. A total score of 5 or more indicates mania.


Recovery
• The Bipolar Recovery Questionnaire (BRQ; Jones et al., 2012). This is a 36-item self-report measure, developed through extensive
consultation with individuals with lived experience of bipolar disorder. It is designed to assess personal experiences of recovery in bipolar
disorder.
Quality of life
• The Brief Quality of Life in Bipolar Disorder (QoL.BD; Michalak et al., 2010). This is a 12-item, disorder-specific quality-of-life measure in
bipolar disorder.
Early warning signs and coping
• The Coping with Prodromes Interview (Lam et al., 2001). This provides a helpful initial indication of the individual's approach to mania
and depression early warning signs. It allows the clinician to capture the individual nature of each person's early warning signs. This
information is then included in the assessment of prodromal coping as part of the cognitive therapy intervention. It can also be helpful to
use a checklist of the sort developed by Lobban et al. (2011) to facilitate the identification of early warning signs. These are particularly
helpful if the client is finding it difficult to identify or articulate the symptoms which they experience.


Clinical rating scales
Observer-rated measures can provide a useful way of evaluating a client's current mood state. Training is required to administer them correctly. The following may be suitable:
• Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS; Hamilton, 1960). This assesses 17 symptoms of depression. Total HDRS score is categorised as follows: <10 (no depression), 10-13 (mild depression), 14-17 (mild to moderate depression) and >17 (moderate to severe depression).
• Mania Rating Scale (MRS; Bech et al., 1978). This assesses 11 symptoms of mania or hypomania based on observations during the clinical interview. The total MRS score is categorised as follows: 0-5 (no mania), 6-9 (hypomania), 10-14 (probable mania) and >15 (definite mania).
A small battery of tests can usefully be employed at the beginning and end of therapy, which includes the BRQ, QoL.BD and the BHS. If necessary, the BDI and ISS may be employed on a sessional basis to obtain essential clinical information.
Treatment for bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder has traditionally been perceived as a genetic and biological illness, with medications such as lithium prescribed as the main source of treatment. However, over the past 15-20 years the importance of psychological treatment for bipolar disorder has been recognised. Structured psychological therapies are now recommended in the UK National Institute of Clinical Excellence guidelines (NICE, 2014) for the treatment of bipolar disorder.

There is increasing evidence that psychological and social factors have an important impact on the onset and course of bipolar disorder.
A number of studies have demonstrated the relationship between life events (e.g. stress) and the onset, severity and duration of both manic
and depressive episodes (e.g. Alloy et al., 2005).
Psychotherapy for bipolar disorder is often carried out in conjunction with pharmacotherapy. Stress which precipitates the onset of
episodes of depression or mania does not have to be an acute upsetting life event. It can be a build-up of life's hassles. The way an individual
responds to these life hassles can alleviate or exacerbate them. Psychotherapy may help clients to examine strategies that help them deal
with the stress that may present in their life. In addition to a biomedical approach, there are four major approaches to psychotherapy
for bipolar disorder: psychoeducation (Colom et al., 2006), cognitive therapy or cognitive-behaviour therapy (CT or CBT; Lam et al., 2010),
interpersonal and social rhythm treatment (IPSRT; Frank, 2005) and family-focused treatment (FFT; Miklowitz, 2008). These approaches
will be described in turn, with particular emphasis on CBT clinical practice with clients with bipolar affective disorder. Psychoeducation is a
common element for all of these approaches, and will briefly be discussed first.
Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation is based on the rationale that treating a condition such as bipolar disorder is not just about prescribing medication. It
assumes that with more information about bipolar disorder clients will be able to engage more actively with their own treatment and
therefore improve their clinical outcomes. Colom reported a randomised controlled study of 120 bipolar clients. The treatment group
received medication and 20 sessions of group psychoeducation (Colom et al., 2003, 2009). The control group received medication and 20
non-structured group sessions. Group sessions were 90 minutes each and each group consisted of 8-12 euthymic clients (Young Mania
Rating Scale < 6, Hamilton Depression Rating Scale < 8). The therapists' style was directive but also encouraged clients' participation.
Topics included in the psychoeducation group included prompting illness awareness, medication adherence, early detection of prodromes
and prompting lifestyle regularity. There was a significant impact on relapse rates and number of episodes in participants in the


psychoeducation group both during therapy and at 2-year follow-up (Colom et al., 2003). This study is unusual in finding objective
evidence of increased medication adherence in the psychoeducation group at follow-up. The gains were still present at 5-year follow-up.
The psychoeducation group had fewer recurrences of any type and spent less time acutely ill (Colom et al., 2009). There are two potential
problems with this approach; first, its expense, as it was delivered by senior clinicians. Second, clients have to be very stable with minimal
symptoms for 6 months prior to the start of the group. It is unclear how easy it is to gather such a group of bipolar clients in routine practice,
as most experience significant levels of subsyndromal symptoms. It is also unclear how well this directive approach would be received in
settings different to the specialist treatment centre where the research was conducted. Morriss et al. (2011) are in the process of evaluating
a multicentre trial to determine the clinical and cost-effectiveness of delivering a joint expert patient and health professional led 21-week
group psychoeducation for bipolar disorder versus unstructured peer group support.
Biomedical approaches
The treatment for bipolar disorder in the past three decades has been predominantly pharmacological. There are several pharmacotherapy
treatment guidelines for bipolar disorder. This includes the second edition of the American Psychiatric Association Practice Guideline for the
Treatment of Patients with Bipolar Disorder (2010); the World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) Guidelines for Biological
Treatment of Bipolar Disorders, Part 1: Treatment of Bipolar Depression (Grunze et al., 2002); the Evidence-Based Guidelines for Treating
Bipolar Disorder: Recommendations from the British Association for Psychopharmacology (Goodwin, 2003); as well the recently updated UK
NICE (2014) guidelines for bipolar disorder, which make specific pharmacological and psychological recommendations for each phase of
bipolar disorder. Readers are recommended to refer to these guidelines for more details when necessary. This section summarises the
recommendations.
Pharmacotherapy in bipolar disorder can be divided into treatment of acute manic, depressive, or mixed episodes, as well as long-
term preventive treatment. For severe acute manic or mixed episodes, an antipsychotic or mood stabiliser such as haloperidol, olanzapine,

quetiapine or risperidone is suggested. For less severe manic episodes, lithium may also be used as a short-term therapeutic agent. If
the client is taking antidepressants, these are normally tapered and discontinued. For acute depression, NICE recommends fluoxetine and
olanzapine as the first-line pharmacological agent with an alternative option of quetiapine.
For long-term treatment, a number of agents are used to prevent relapses, which require careful serum level monitoring. Based on current
evidence lithium is recommended as the first-line medication for long-term relapse prevention. If lithium proves ineffective or unacceptable
to the client, alternatives are valproate or olanzapine.
Twenty to forty percent of bipolar clients do not appear to benefit from lithium (Goodwin, 2003; Prien & Potter, 1990). This may be
due to both difficulties with adherence as well as limitations in the effectiveness of the medication itself. Non-adherence rates for lithium
have been estimated at 18-53% (Goodwin & Jamison, 1990; Maj, 2003). Lithium has a narrow therapeutic band, meaning that therapeutic
and toxic levels of lithium are quite close to each other. Although many other new mood stabilisers are commonly used in clinical practice
(Moncrieff, 1995; Solomon et al., 1995), it was recently concluded that 'the only medication with incontrovertible proof of efficacy in
multiple maintenance-phase studies is lithium' (Gnanadesikan et al., 2003, p. 203). With regard to the newer mood stabilisers, olanzapine is
more effective in preventing mania whereas lamotrigine has been found to have a long-term role in delaying or preventing the recurrence of
depressive episodes (Calabrese et al., 2002).
Other antipsychotics such as clozapine are also used clinically but more research is needed, as the adverse side effects associated with
antipsychotics may outweigh the benefits (Kusumakar, 2002).
Cognitive behavioural approach
Rationale for the cognitive behavioural approach
The manifestation of bipolar disorder is predominately affective, cognitive and behavioural. Clinically, it has been observed that mania

can fuel itself. The chaotic and disruptive lifestyle which occurs during manic episodes can lead to more episodes. This suggests that
psychotherapy targeting these areas can be useful. Some individuals with bipolar disorder who have frequent relapses often engage in
striving behaviour to 'make up for lost time'. Hence, it is important to help clients develop good daily living routines and to target their
extreme striving or goal-attainment beliefs and related behaviours. Early detection of warning signs of manic or depressive episodes and
application of effective coping strategies during the prodromal phases are also important in preventing the development of a fullblown
episode. Both promoting a good daily routine and helping clients detect and cope with early warning signs or manic or depressive episodes
involve self-monitoring and self-regulation. These skills are learned in CBT.
CBT is based on the assumption that our thoughts, mood and behaviour affect each another. Therapists work with clients to develop a
formulation and set of goals for therapy. Following this a range of cognitive and behavioural techniques are utilised to monitor, examine and
change patterns of unhelpful thinking and behaviour that are associated with undesirable mood states. Hence, CBT is well suited to helping
bipolar clients to develop enhanced coping skills.
A number of randomised controlled trials of individual CBT have been published (Ball et al., 2006; Jones et al., 2015; Lam et al., 2003, 2005;
Meyer & Hautzinger, 2012; Miklowitz et al., 2007; Perry et al., 1999; Scott et al., 2001, 2006; Zaretsky et al., 1999). These studies show that
CBT has been most effective in preventing episodes for individuals who are euthymic and in the reduction of depressive symptoms (Lam et
al., 2010).
A study by Lam et al. (2003) illustrates the positive effect of cognitive therapy (CT) on bipolar disorder. Lam et al. conducted a randomised
controlled study of 103 DSM-IV bipolar I clients who were experiencing frequent relapses whilst taking prescribed commonly used mood
stabilisers. Participants were randomised into a CT group or a control group. Both groups received mood stabilisers and regular psychiatric
follow-up. The CT group received, on average, 14 sessions of CT during the first 6 months and two booster sessions in the second 6 months.
Over the 12-month period, the CT group had significantly fewer bipolar episodes, days in a bipolar episode and admissions. They also had
significantly higher social functioning and showed fewer mood symptoms on monthly mood questionnaires as well as less fluctuation

in manic symptoms. In a 2-year post-therapy follow-up there remained a significant effect in favour of therapy for relapse prevention of
depressive but not manic relapses. However, the impact on relapse was restricted to the first 18 months of follow-up (Lam et al., 2005). The
findings indicate that CT specifically designed for relapse prevention in bipolar affective disorder is a useful intervention in conjunction with
mood stabilisers. It was suggested that the effect of booster sessions or maintenance therapy should be investigated to extend the impact on
relapse beyond the 18-month follow-up period. Both Scott et al. (2001) and Ball et al. (2006), using a similar approach with bipolar patients,
reported improvement mainly in depressive episodes.
Not all controlled trials of CBT for bipolar disorder have found it to be helpful. In a study of 253 participants, Scott et al. (2006) did not
find any beneficial effects of the addition of CBT to routine medication. However, participants were at various stages of illness. Thirty-two
percent of the sample were in an acute episode of depression, mania, hypomania or mixed state. Lam (2006) argued that there were inherent
difficulties with the study design, which included the therapeutic techniques that were utilised at different phases of illness, meaning that
it was hard to interpret what was being evaluated. More recently, Jones et al. (2015) compared CBT designed to enhance personal recovery
outcomes in individuals with recent bipolar disorder (< 5 years) with treatment as usual. This study of 67 individuals found evidence of
significant improvements in personal recovery and increased time to relapse of depression or mania over up to 15 months follow-up.
Coping with bipolar early warning signs
In bipolar disorder, the early warning sign period extends from the time of the first appearance of symptoms to the time when a full-blown
episode is evident. The phrase 'early warning sign' is often used as shorthand for the symptoms at this early stage of an episode. A number
of retrospective studies have shown that individuals with bipolar disorder can detect early warning signs (Joyce, 1985; Lam & Wong, 1997;
Molnar et al., 1988; Smith & Tarrier, 1992), a finding confirmed in a longitudinal study by Perry et al. (1999) that evaluated the effectiveness
for people with bipolar disorder of an intervention for identifying early warning signs and the development of action plans. They reported
a significant reduction in manic episodes, which was maintained at 18-month follow-up. Lobban et al. (2010) used a cluster randomised


controlled trial (RCT) design and trained care coordinators to deliver enhanced relapse prevention in their multidisciplinary environments.
This study found that time to relapse was increased in people receiving the intervention, and social and occupational functioning was
improved.
There is a consensus that each client's pattern or combination of early warning signs and symptoms may be unique. Hence using a
checklist to elicit early warning signs has the inherent problem of losing some of the more idiosyncratic early warning signs. Asking for
spontaneous reports of early warning signs has the advantage of personalising the early warning signs in the individual's context. For
example, one idiosyncratic early warning sign was that 'Thought for the Day' on Radio 4 seemed to convey a special message to the client;
another was that the client's family dog became evil. However, checklists can be helpful at times as a starting point if a client is struggling to
detect idiosyncratic signs (e.g. Lobban et al., 2011; Smith & Tarrier, 1992).
Studies have found that 25-30% of bipolar clients could not detect early warning signs of depression whereas only 7.5% could not detect
early warning signs of mania (Lam & Wong, 1997; Molnar et al., 1988). The high proportion of clients who couldn't detect depression early
warning signs could be due to its insidious onset. Another problem for many bipolar clients is that some depression early warning signs are
not qualitatively different from their residual symptoms. This makes the detection of such early warning signs more difficult. Across the
studies that listed individual early warning signs, there was strong agreement about early warning signs of mania. Six most often reported
early warning signs of mania were sleeping less, more goal-directed behaviour, irritability, increased sociability, thoughts starting to race
and increased optimism. The most common early warning signs of depression reported across studies were loss of interest in activities or
people, not able to put worries or anxieties aside, interrupted sleep, and feeling sad or wanting to cry. Clients reported fewer depression early
warning signs and there seemed to be diversity in the report of prodromal signs and symptoms of depression.
Lam et al. (2001) reported that bipolar clients could reliably report mania and depression early warning signs 18 months apart. The
duration of manic or depressive early warning stages varies from individual to individual. However, it is encouraging that most clients have
a reasonable period for early intervention prior to a full-blown episode. For example, Smith and Tarrier (1992) reported that in their study,

average duration of early warning signs of depression was 19 days (standard deviation = 19 days) and average duration of mania early
warning signs was 29 days (standard deviation = 28 days). However, Molnar et al. (1988) reported that for his sample, mania early warning
signs lasted on average 20.5 days (with a range of 1-84 days) whereas average length of depression early warning signs was 11 days (with a
range of 2-31 days).
Ratings of how clients coped with mania early warning signs contributed significantly to the clients' level of functioning at baseline
after clients' depression and mania symptoms were controlled for statistically (Lam & Wong, 1997). These also predicted clients' manic
symptoms 18 months later and whether clients had relapsed during the 18 months after the levels of mood symptoms at baseline were
controlled for (Lam et al., 2001). The most common good coping strategies for early warning signs of mania employed by participants
were: 'modifying high activities and restraining themselves', 'engaging in calming activities', 'taking extra time to rest or sleep' and 'seeing a
doctor'. Poor coping strategies included 'continuing to move about and take on more tasks', 'enjoying the feeling of high' and 'going out more
and spending money'. It is interesting to note that the spontaneous coping strategies reported by clients are behavioural. The most common
coping strategies for depression early warning signs were 'getting myself organised and keeping busy', 'getting social support and meeting
people', 'distracting myself from negative thoughts by doing more' and 'recognising realistic thoughts and evaluating if things are worth
worrying about'. Poor coping strategies included 'staying in bed and hoping it would go away', 'doing nothing' and 'taking extra medication
such as lithium or sleeping pills'.
Dysfunctional attitudes
Despite the encouraging outcome in developing CBT for bipolar affective disorder (Lam et al., 2010, 2003; Scott et al., 2001), very little is
known about whether there are any differences in dysfunctional attitudes between unipolar clients, bipolar clients and normal controls.
The cognitive model for bipolar disorder postulates high goal striving as a risk factor for bipolar disorder (Lam et al., 2010; Wright and
Lam, 2003). Scott et al. (2001) found that euthymic bipolar clients showed significantly higher scores on the Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale

(DAS) as well as the 'Need for Approval' and 'Perfectionism' subscales than healthy control. Lam et al. (2004), in a principal component
analysis of the 24-item short DAS of 143 bipolar I clients, found three factors: (1) 'Goal-attainment', (2) 'Dependency' and (3) 'Achievement'.
No significant differences were found when the validation sample of 143 bipolar I clients was compared with 109 clients suffering from
unipolar depression on any of the three factors. When participants who were likely to be in a major depressive episode were excluded,
the scores of bipolar clients were significantly higher than euthymic unipolar clients in factor 1, 'Goal attainment'. Goal-attainment also
correlated with the number of past hospitalisations due to manic episodes and to bipolar episodes as a whole.
Clinical practice: cognitive therapy techniques
Engagement
As with any form of psychological therapy, engagement is crucial for good therapeutic outcomes. For a cognitive therapy approach to
bipolar disorder, it is important that the client understands and accepts a version of our basic vulnerability-stress model of bipolar disorder.
However, like all other aspects of therapy with this client group, this cannot be achieved in a didactic fashion. Engaging clients with the
model needs to be achieved in a collaborative manner, which makes sense to them in terms of their own individual experience. There are
several approaches to this that we normally take in therapy.
Written information
We usually provide the client with written information about cognitive therapy for bipolar disorder and the model on which it is based. This
is typically done in the first or second session. The handout which we use has been published elsewhere (Lam et al., 2010). The client is asked
to read this and to give feedback on the elements of this information that is helpful and less helpful. The client is given clear permission to
disagree with some or all of the information, so that we can engage in a genuine discussion about the approach.
There are two issues that can arise, either following discussion of the handout or in general.

• Mental health difficulties on a continuum: Some clients do not believe that the diagnosis that they have been given is correct. They may
either think that their experiences are just part of who they are and therefore not an illness, or sometimes that there is an illness present
but not bipolar disorder. Where this issue arises, it is not helpful to get into a debate about the rights and wrongs of diagnosis. Usually
it is helpful to have a discussion about the psychological approach to mental health/illness that assumes that an individual's' propensity
for different mental health problems is arrayed across continua. Therefore, if an individual can acknowledge that they are having some
problems in living which they would like help with, it is usually possible to engage in therapy even if they deny that they have bipolar
disorder per se.
• Integrating medical and psychological models of illness: Some clients are over-compliant with a medical model of illness. This means
that they see their illness in terms of a chemical imbalance that requires pharmacological correction. This is not surprising, as clients
often report that this is the message they have taken from their meetings with their psychiatrists. It can often be helpful in this situation
to engage in a discussion about the interaction between psychological and social factors in a wide range of medical problems including
asthma, arthritis and diabetes. This can help the client to see that there is a false dichotomy between medical and psychological aspects
of both physical and mental health problems and that optimal outcomes are often achieved by an appropriate combination of both
approaches.
Engagement as a process
Engagement is not something that happens in the first few sessions of therapy and is then safely ignored. Although you need to engage
clients to begin therapy, you also need to maintain this as therapy continues. For individuals with strong achievement motivation and
perfectionism, characteristic of many bipolar clients, the overall cognitive behavioural approach is very helpful in maintaining engagement.
Taking a genuinely collaborative problem-solving stance in therapy can help therapists to avoid getting locked into conflicts or battles of

wills with the client. It is crucial to respect the client's own perspective even when this does not seem to be correct therapeutically, but also
to explore this with Socratic questioning and other cognitive techniques. This balance is important, as in our experience bipolar clients are
very alert to when therapists are using questioning in a more directive or didactic way.
Life charts and shared account of symptom development
Life charts are a common part of cognitive behaviour therapy. An example of a life chart for Sarah, the subject of the case study described at
start of this chapter, is given in Figure 10.1. Life charts are especially crucial for engagement and therapy with bipolar clients. The process of
developing and applying life chart information is dealt with in detail later in the chapter. At this stage it is useful to highlight that working
with the client to generate accounts of the interaction between mood episodes, psychological factors, behaviour, life events, medication and
substance use is crucial to engagement. When the client is aware that there is a pattern to their experiences it also indicates that this pattern
can potentially be changed. Many individuals will initially see their episodes as coming out of the blue. The realisation that this is not the
case is often a key moment in engaging clients with the therapeutic intervention.
Formulation
CBT for bipolar disorder is best delivered on the basis of an individual formulation. The client and therapist work together to build an
initial formulation and set of goals for therapy. This includes information gathered during the assessment phase such as symptom and life
histories and also from formal psychometric measures, which are detailed in the previous section. Generating a large, detailed formulation
can sometimes be overwhelming for the client. It can therefore be helpful to start with simple, maintenance formulations as proposed by
Kinderman and Lobban (2000).
A simple formulation presented in Figure 10.2 was developed for Sarah, mentioned in the case study at the start of the chapter. The
formulation is based on a past episode of mania. When Sarah returned from London she started work at a bar in her nearest town. The bar

was short-staffed so Sarah took on extra shifts and was working almost every day. She also began to stay late as there was a culture of staff
drinks after closing hours. She enjoyed the social aspects of the job as everyone was a similar age and shared common interests. The change
to Sarah's social and sleep routine triggered the early warning sign phase. As Sarah was unaware of the change in her mood she continued to
engage in activities which further disrupted her sleep, social and work routine, which eventually led to a full-blown manic episode.
TRIGGER
New job
Change in routine
Socializing with friends
CONSEQUENCES
Leave job
Lose contact with new
friends
BEHAVIOURAL CHANGES
Going to bed late
Drinking more alcohol
Less sleep than usual
MANIC EPISODE
No sleep
Racing thoughts
Heavy alcohol use
Other drug use
Hospitalization
POOR COPING
STRATEGIES
Lack of awareness of
change in mood
Continued disruption to
sleep, social and work life
COGNITIVE CHANGES
Ideas flowing fast
Difficulty concentrating


Figure 10.2 Formulation for Sarah based on a previous episode of mania
Building a formulation of this type allows the client to begin to see how specific elements of CBT (including intervention during the early
warning sign stage) can impact on their own pattern of thoughts, feelings and behaviours.
Goal setting
The setting of agreed goals is a further important part of cognitive therapy. There is a broad range of goals that clients might report and some
of the main areas are discussed later. It is important the therapist and client work together to identify the goals which are important for the
client. Therapists therefore need to be alert to goals which are generated for others or because the client 'feels they should'. As with other
client groups, unless the bipolar client has ownership of his or her therapy goals, the hard work of therapy will be made substantially more
difficult. Areas for goal setting include both symptom reduction and pursuing valued life goals.
Symptom reduction
Clients will often highlight a desire to learn cognitive therapy techniques to help them to reduce and control symptoms of mania or
depression. Sometimes initial goals are unrealistic; for example, 'to never feel low again' or 'to be happy whatever happens'. Clearly it is
important to acknowledge that such goals are understandable but also unrealistic. This can lead to a discussion of what could be reasonably
expected in these areas.
Whilst Sarah (mentioned in the case study at the start of the chapter) had not experienced an acute episode of depression or mania for
the past 3 years, she still was experiencing fluctuations in her mood, in particular depression. Sarah was due a promotion to management.
Because of her past experiences, she was worried that this might trigger an acute episode. She identified a goal of increasing control over her

mood symptoms so they had less impact upon her life. This would be achieved by further exploration of her early warning signs and the
development of a detailed coping plan.
Life goals
Whilst some clients will highlight symptom issues from the outset, others will not. Many people will come to therapy frustrated and upset
with the impact that their illness has had on practical aspects of their life. This may be in terms of family relationships, work, study or other
areas. This frustration will often be associated with a desire to fix problems totally and immediately. Again this should be discussed in an
open way. With functional goals it will often be important to work out what might be realistically achievable within therapy and then to
break down the steps towards such large valued life goals.
Sarah was currently single and her last relationship was 3 years ago, prior to her last manic episode. She had gained 2 stone in weight and
this made her feel unattractive and low in confidence. She had previously been a very active person who enjoyed going to the gym and being
involved in local community arts projects. Sarah's goals for therapy were to lose weight through both diet and exercise, take up drawing again
and become more involved in the local art community. She felt this would give her the confidence to seek out a new relationship, which was
her long-term goal. Sarah and the therapist worked together in a collaborative manner to evaluate each of these goals. They discussed over
what time scale each goal might be realistically possible and the circumstances which might enhance or impede progress. From there it was
possible to identify specific steps with respect to each goal.
In addition to symptom reduction and pursuing valued life goals, additional goals may include medication adherence, building social
networks, challenging dysfunctional beliefs, introducing structure and routine into one's life, reducing risky behaviour, identifying early
warning signs for relapse, and working with unrealistic positive thoughts. These goals will be discussed in turn.


Medication adherence
Evidence to date indicates that cognitive therapy is effective for bipolar disorder in conjunction with appropriate medication. Therefore
adherence to medication regimes may be identified as therapeutic goal. The target here would be to work with the client to identify
and adhere to an optimum system of pharmacological treatment. This involves the client being supported in working actively with their
psychiatric team to address limitations of current medications and for clients to have a clear say in their own treatment. In our experience,
it is important for clients to identify a prescribing clinician with whom they can develop a collaborative relationship (including use of as
needed medication to address prodromal changes).
Building social networks
As indicated in the assessment section, many bipolar clients, even when remitted, will have some social difficulties. These are often made
worse by having a limited social network. Sometimes this network will have been reduced over time as a consequence of episodes of illness.
Working with the client to build up a combination of formal and informal support can be important in maintaining therapy gains.
One of Sarah's goals for therapy was to become more involved in the local arts community. She had tried going to events in the past but was
very nervous about arriving on her own and had left early without talking to anyone. Working together, the therapist and Sarah identified
a local drawing group. Sarah felt anxious about the first session but the pros and cons of attending were evaluated. The therapist and Sarah
discussed her past experience of attending events and brainstormed ideas so that she felt more in control of managing the situation. This
included staying until the end of the group where there was time to initiate conversations with people. With this support Sarah was able to
attend the drawing class, and by the end of therapy she had taken a small role in the organisation of a local arts and craft event.


Challenging dysfunctional beliefs
There is no evidence that dysfunctional beliefs have a causal role in the onset of bipolar illness. Indeed they may act as a coping mechanism.
However, it is postulated that these beliefs may interact with the illness and predispose bipolar clients to have a more severe course of illness.
Clinically it is observed that clients with highly driven beliefs are more at risk of further episodes, sometimes through lack of routine and
structure and at other times through disappointment. These beliefs can be tackled by traditional cognitive therapy techniques. A list of pros
and cons of such extreme beliefs can help clients to step back and examine the drawbacks of such beliefs. In doing so, it is important to
acknowledge the advantages of having such beliefs. A life chart (such as that given in Figure 10.1) can also be a very useful tool for both the
client and the therapist for clarifying the nature and effects of past coping behaviour. It is important that further behaviour experiments are
carried out to help clients to consolidate their intellectual understanding of altering dysfunctional beliefs and establishing more functional
behaviour. For example, having understood that 'catching up for lost time' is part of very driven behaviour which can be counterproductive,
clients can be encouraged to have more regular work and rest patterns that may lead to more stable mood, which in turn may lead to more
productive work results.
Structure and routine
Vulnerability-stress models note the importance of daily structure and routine for individuals with bipolar disorder. The development of
structure is an important part of cognitive therapy. Clients record their patterns of activity from early on in therapy, completing an activity
schedule that covers 24 hours a day. This is important, as many clients will not have a stable routine when they enter therapy. They may
have very erratic sleep patterns and may be more active at night than during the day. Working to improve this situation is not as simple
as it may first appear. Many individuals with bipolar disorder are highly motivated, driven people. If they feel that they are being asked

to engage in behaviour that they see as restrictive or limiting, they will not engage. The information used from the assessment process is
employed to look at the extent to which chaos may have been associated with previous mood history. There then follows a baseline period of
activity recording to establish current patterns. Normally the client will also record their mood on the same chart for each day between - 10
(lowest ever) and +10 (highest ever). It is then possible in session to review the connections between mood, activity and sleep. The process
of increasing daily structure and routine is best done as an experiment to see whether it has an impact on mood and mood stability. When
planning this, the therapist is aiming to increase the predictability of key markers in the day, such as sleep, wake and main meal times. It
also provides an opportunity to plan for a balance of activities during the week between domestic, leisure and work tasks. Although clients
may be initially sceptical about this process, they often find that it has significant benefits. They often report being more productive and
creative when their routine is less chaotic. There is also the potential for planning for periods when disruption is unavoidable. For instance,
when a client is going to undertake transatlantic travel, it is important that they plan their activities to allow them to cope with the circadian
disruption that this causes. The outcome of this planning is often that individuals are able to cope with a broader range of activities and
challenges than when routine seemed more spontaneous.
When producing the life chart in Figure 10.1 with Sarah it became apparent that the majority of her past episodes had been triggered by
loss of structure and routine. Following her last episode of mania (described in the formulation section), Sarah stopped working and spent a
lot of time at home. She lost contact with all of her new friends and decided that she needed to try to avoid any sources of stress. If she had
disturbed sleep during the night, she would spend the next day in bed to compensate for this. If she had tasks to do, she would put them
off in case they caused any more pressure for her. The experience of being at home alone with little to do led to a period of depression. After
working with her care coordinator Sarah acknowledged that there were activities that she had avoided because she was fearful of becoming
unwell again. They gradually reintroduced some activities into Sarah's life, which included applying for a new job. Sarah was successful in
her application and was currently on track for a promotion. Sarah had voiced her worries to the therapist about becoming unwell, and the

importance of maintaining a stable routine was highlighted. This included making sure she had two days off a week, not working for more
than 8 hours in a row, and ensuring that if she was working the following morning that she was in bed by 11 p.m. the previous night.
Moderating risky behaviour and avoiding risky situations
A particular important component of cognitive therapy is to examine risky behaviour or risky situations that have led to manic or depressive
episodes in the past and so may lead to relapses in the future. This is very idiosyncratic and is best done by going through the client's life
chart, like that in Figure 10.1. The aim is to identify any situations that may lead to risky behaviour such as use of street drugs or excessive
alcohol, preparing for examinations, or engaging in work situations that involve the client switching into a disorganised daily routine
or a state of sleep deprivation. Work involving long hours and extensive travel requirements can be associated with onset of prodromal
symptoms. It is therefore important that the individual acts to moderate these areas as far as is possible. A balanced lifestyle, which involves
regular and consistent work hours, often in fact enhances work output and performance in the long run. Furthermore, risky behaviour often
has an impulsive element. The delaying tactics described later can be a useful technique for controlling impulsivity. It is not unusual for
risky, impulsive behaviour to be an early warning sign of the onset of a relapse, in which case delaying tactics can be used as part of coping.
Early warning signs and coping
To define the individual's pattern of early warning signs, clients are asked to describe what aspects of their behaviour, thinking or mood in
their experience suggests they are entering a manic or depressive episode. It is important to consider that the symptoms have to be specific
and easily detectable. Often it is helpful to ask them to anchor their early warning signs in a social context, for example in their social
interaction with others and comments from other people. Each individual early warning sign is written on a piece of paper. Clients are
encouraged to sort the pile of papers into three groups: the early, middle and late stages. Most clients find it useful to sort the pile of papers
first into early and late stages and the rest go into the middle stage. The therapist and client then further fine-tune the pattern of early
warning signs to make sure there is no ambiguity in wording. Mood states are difficult to gauge. Hence, they are often carefully defined and

anchored in the client's social context if possible. The behaviour linked to the mood state should be mapped out. Often behaviour is easier to
monitor. For example, if irritability is an early warning sign, therapists can ask how the irritability shows itself. One client was able to say
that he is usually irritable with his wife and picks on her at the very early stage of an episode. As the episode unfolds he is usually irritable
with his daughter, and at the final stage he is irritable with almost anyone. In practice, the last stage is almost a full-blown manic or
depressive episode for most clients. However, it is important to distinguish it from the full-blown episode. Sometimes clients find the
transition into the full-blown episode quite blurry and usually move from the late stage of mania early warning signs to a full-blown episode
within a day. The signs of these three stages are copied onto an early warning signs form. Next, the therapist asks the client to estimate the
time intervals they have before the very early stage becomes the middle stage and the middle stage becomes the late stage. The therapist then
discusses with the client ways of coping with bipolar early warning signs using cognitive and behavioural techniques. The cognitive model
of emotional disorder about the way thinking, behaviour and mood can affect each other is used. Some examples of coping strategies of
mania early warning signs are avoiding stimulation, engaging in calming activities, resisting the temptation to engage in further goal-
directed behaviour and prioritising tasks. Cognitive behavioural techniques of routine, prioritising, pleasurable and mastery activities and
challenging of negative thoughts have an important part in coping with depression early warning signs. During the depression early
warning sign stage, activating the client's social network for support is important. Social companionship and shared activities can prevent
clients from ruminating about their depression leading to an increase in depression symptoms (Lam et al., 2003; Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991).
Most clients find it helpful to discuss unrealistic worries with a close companion. An empathic confidant can inject some reality into clients'
overwhelming and unrealistic worries. Medical appointments and self-medication can be seen as good coping strategies. Making good use of
hospital and professional help is part of a client's coping strategy. It is very important for clients to have a mutually respectful and trusting
relationship with their psychiatrists. A significant proportion of bipolar clients obtain their medication from general practitioners. It is often
helpful for clients to show their key workers or prescribing doctors their 'Early warning signs and coping with mania form'. It may be a good
practice to enclose this record in the discharge report. How early professionals should be called upon to help depends on the client's resources

as well as how long the stages are for that particular client. It is important to bear in mind that each list of coping strategies is idiosyncratic
and is tailored to the client's circumstances and needs rather than being an idealised list of 'perfect' strategies. Sarah had developed an early
warning sign and coping plan with her care coordinator. However, she felt that this was very medically focused. The main coping strategies
were calling her psychiatrist and taking more medication. One of her goals for therapy was to develop a more detailed plan that explored the
use of a range of coping strategies in response to early warning signs.
Box 10.1 shows an example of the 'Early warning signs and coping with mania form'.
Box 10.1 Early warning signs and coping with mania form for Sarah
My very early warning signs of mania are:
1. Waking up early (2 hours)
2. More energetic (e.g. spend an hour tidying my old belongings and want to do more)
3. Wanting to spend more time with people (ring up four or five of my friends in a week to arrange meeting them)
4. Ideas flowing fast
5. Drinking during the week
Action:
1. Relax by listening to soft music
2. Have a relaxing bath and go to bed earlier
3. No drinking during the week and moderate drinking at the weekend

4. Only go out once during the week
5. Defer planning
My middle warning signs of mania are:
1. Speaking a lot faster - mum would say slow down
2. Increased spending on clothes and makeup
3. Really wanting to go out - ringing anybody I know
4. Trouble sleeping - only four hours a night
5. Smoking up to 20 cigarettes a day (normally a packet lasts 3-4 days)
Action:
1. Reduce hours at work and do relaxing activities such as walking and listening to soft music and sit by the pond
2. Get medication to help me to sleep
3. No alcohol in the house
4. Make sure I only do the minimal in the house and no extra cleaning
5. Give my credit card to my mum
My late warning signs of mania are:
1. Racing thoughts - lots of ideas about how to make improvements to the workplace

2. Increased sexual appetite
3. Not going to bed
4. Smoking cannabis
Action:
1. Give my mobile phone to Mum at night-time
2. Cancel my social commitments
3. See my psychiatrist
4. Time off work
There are several considerations to bear in mind when eliciting early warning signs. First, the decision of where the early warning sign stage
ends and a full-blown episode of illness begins can be difficult where onset is more gradual. The onset of mania is often more acute and
is less of a problem. However, a depressive episode may gradually become worse over several weeks or months. Second, it is not unusual
for some clients to experience residual symptoms, which may be similar to early warning signs. Where this is the case, it is even harder
to define when residual symptoms change to the early warning sign stage. As mentioned earlier, some clients find it hard to detect early
warning signs spontaneously, particularly for depression. Consistent with the ethos of monitoring and regulating, therapists should take
every opportunity to map out the details of individual patterns of early warning signs whenever clients are in this stage and help clients to
practise a more adaptive way of coping. For clients who truly cannot list early warning signs spontaneously, it is often helpful to suggest that
they should discuss them with close companions or family members. As a last resort, a list of common early warning signs can be presented

to help clients to identify those that are applicable to them. However, great care should be taken that these early warning signs identified are
then elaborated and anchored in the client's idiosyncratic context. Finally, bipolar clients can experience frightening psychotic symptoms
at an early stage and as the episode deepens. These psychotic experiences can become increasingly bizarre. Often clients find it helpful to
discuss these frightening experience with someone who is treating them with empathy and understanding. These experiences can be very
'lonely' if clients cannot share them even with their intimate partners or close friends.
In working out coping strategies, it is important to consider the client's resources as well as problems. Therapists should rely on Socratic
questioning and guided discovery rather than prescribing coping strategies. If therapists rely on persuasion or prescribing coping strategies,
clients may find their sense of autonomy offended and hence reject therapists' suggestions. In any case, clients' circumstances are different.
Techniques prescribed routinely without taking clients' experience and circumstances into consideration are unlikely to work. It is not
unusual for bipolar clients to like the early stages of mania. They find being more confident, energetic and sociable enjoyable. They may want
to pursue certain risky behaviours to get the best out of their high levels of energy. The temptation is understandable, particularly when
clients usually suffer from depressive residual symptoms. Therapists should respect the client's opinions but discuss the pros and cons of
certain coping strategies in order to guide them to come to a conclusion about whether these strategies are dysfunctional. It often works
better if clients can see the pros and cons and then decide on the most appropriate coping strategies for managing the early warning signs
for manic episodes.
Working with unrealistic positive ideas
Many of the features of cognitive therapy for bipolar clients, particularly concerning episodes of low mood, are recognisable from CBT for
clients with depression. The issue of working with the thoughts associated with elevated mood can present a different problem. Whereas
when working with low mood and negative thoughts both therapist and client are working to try to remove unwanted symptoms, with

elevated mood and positive thoughts many clients are at best ambivalent at first. The main approaches that are important here are
retrospective evaluation of thoughts and outcomes; challenging unrealistic, overoptimistic thoughts; and using delaying tactics.

Retrospective evaluation of thoughts and outcomes
The therapist asks the client to recall an episode of mania or hypomania and the symptoms that may have accompanied it. They then recall
how they behaved and thought in particular situations within this episode. Often there will be a situation in which the person engaged in
risky or impulsive behaviour, which can then be explored for associated thoughts and outcomes. In recalling this, it is important to work
with the client to try to identify early changes in thinking and to track these as the situation developed. As the client begins to see such
thinking as symptomatic of a particular mood state, rather than 'it's just me,' it becomes more likely that they will be able to intervene
when such thoughts occur in the future. Another important issue in evaluating such situations is to clarify the outcomes. There is often a
tendency for the client to focus on the positive aspects of changed mood and to downplay the immediate and later negative consequences
of their actions. Exploring these negative consequences can help clients to make informed choices about changes that they want to make to
their lives so as to achieve their valued life goals.
Sarah, the subject of the case study that opened the chapter, recalled a situation when she was living in London and working in a bar as one
of the supervisors. After a period of low mood she came to work feeling very positive. As she began drafting the new work rota she started
to think about how the bar could be managed better. As she thought about possible improvements she became more excited, and when she
finished work for the day she went home to work on a development plan. Sarah mentioned to her manager that she had some good ideas, to
which he responded neutrally, with little interest. The following day she informed him that she had developed a 3-year plan for the bar that
she was certain would revolutionise the way it was run, which would lead to an increase in bar sales compared to their other competitors.
When he questioned some of her ideas and refused to act immediately on the plan, she responded angrily. She then left work and spent

the day at home phoning managers from the other bars in the chain in an effort to move her plans forward. Again she became very angry
as she felt that others were not recognising the revolutionary nature of the plan that she had developed. This continued over a period of
several days, after which she was called into work and given a formal warning over her behaviour. Soon after this, her mood declined and
she experienced an episode of severe depression. In therapy it was important to clarify the true nature of this episode. When Sarah first
described it, she mainly recalled feeling positive, excited and full of good ideas. It was only on further discussion that it became clear that the
manner in which she had approached her managers and her level of interest with this particular idea was out of character. She also became
aware that she had put her job at risk as a result of her approach to this. Given her relatively junior role within the bar, it was not realistic to
expect her to be given responsibility for planning an overall strategy for its development.
Challenging thoughts
Once it is agreed that there are episodes where patterns of thinking are symptomatic of mood change towards hypomania, clients may
be asked to work on thought challenges. They will first do this retrospectively, recalling the unrealistic, overly optimistic, non-adaptive
thoughts they had in specific situations, such as described by Sarah. They would then work with the therapist to identify alternative more
realistic, adaptive thoughts - just as when dealing with pessimistic thoughts associated with depression. The primary difference here is that
bipolar clients will only engage with this process once they understand why it might be appropriate to alter what at first glance may feel like
'good thoughts'.
Delaying tactics
As indicated earlier it is extremely helpful to build up cognitive therapy skills for challenging unrealistic thoughts when the client is in
remission so that they can then draw on them when significant mood changes occur. However, this is not always possible. Some clients come
into therapy in an elevated mood before it has been possible for them to establish skilful cognitive approaches to coping with early warning


signs. In these cases it is very important to avoid getting into battles with such clients. If they come in, often after a period of low mood,
excited about a good idea, they will not welcome a negative reaction from their therapist.
One approach, which was first described by Monica Basco, is the delaying tactic (Basco & Rush, 1996). Here the therapist asks the client to
describe the idea that they have. If it appears to be a risky or potentially harmful idea, it is helpful to explore with the client what they see
as the positive and negative aspects of trying to implement the idea. Often clients identify other people being resistant to the new idea as
the main negative aspect of their risky or potentially harmful thoughts. It is also helpful to review whether the client can identify previous
periods when they have had ideas that excited them in this way and what the positive and negative outcomes were. It is important here
to take an open-minded approach. Many bipolar clients are creative individuals and some ideas that do not immediately make sense to the
therapist may in fact be very positive. The delaying tactic allows for this possibility. The client will usually be adamant that this plan is a
very good one and that it is not associated with any mental health issues. The therapist therefore asks the client if they are willing to put the
idea to the test. If it is a good idea now, it will be a good idea in a day or two. Clients will normally acknowledge this and that their patience
in fully evaluating their idea might bring others round. It also gives time for their mood to change again. Thus, if the evidence accumulates
to indicate that the idea has merit, the client gets more support. If it is mood driven, it increases the chances of potential harm being avoided.
Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy
Although there is strong evidence that bipolar clients experience more life events prior to the onset of an episode compared to non-
psychiatric controls (Bebbington et al., 1993; Johnson & Roberts, 1995; Jones, 2002; Kennedy et al., 1983; Perris, 1984), when compared to
people with diagnoses of schizophrenia or unipolar depression, rates of life events are similar (Bebbington et al., 1993; Swann et al., 1990).
Clinically it is also observed that some bipolar clients develop a manic episode after a couple of sleepless nights due to stress, long distance
travelling or jet lag. Wehr et al. (1987) proposed that sleep disruption was a primary route to mania, with disruption of social routines and
sleep leading to a state of sleepless hyperactivity. Malkoff-Schwartz et al. (1998) tested the role of social rhythm-disruption events in bipolar


disorder. Thirty-nine bipolar clients were monitored in a longitudinal study. Each life event was rated for threat (unpleasantness) and social
rhythm disruptions (the extent to which the event disrupts social routine and sleep). Eight weeks prior to manic episodes, significantly more
clients had social rhythm disruption events compared to 8-week episode-free periods for the same clients. More recent research has support
the proposal that individuals with bipolar spectrum diagnoses are more likely to have increased mood disturbance following life events
which disrupt sleep and social rhythms, and that these events can themselves cause such disruption (Boland et al., 2012; Sylvia et al., 2009).
IPSRT (Frank, 2005) is based on the instability theory first postulated by Goodwin and Jamison (1990) that bipolar disorder is
characterised by a particular sensitivity to circadian disturbance which impacts on sleep patterns and triggers mood episodes. IPSRT
therefore helps clients to monitor and stabilise patterns of sleep and activity. It is also informed by interpersonal therapy (Klerman et al.,
1984; Weissman et al., 2000) in that it provides individuals with support to address experiences of change and loss linked to their mental
health issues.
There have been three RCT evaluations of IPSRT to date (Frank, 1999; Frank et al., 1999, 2005; Miklowitz et al., 2007; Swartz et al., 2012).
In the first study (Frank, 1999; Frank et al., 1999, 2005) 175 individuals with bipolar I disorder were recruited when acutely ill (66%
depression, 44% mania). They were then randomised to receive either IPSRT or clinical management until stabilisation. Once stabilised,
they were either maintained on the intervention previously offered or swapped to receive the alternate intervention. This relatively complex
design therefore meant that people could either receive IPSRT/IPSRT, IPSRT/clinical management, clinical management/IPSRT or clinical
management/clinical management across acute and maintenance phases. An interim analysis of 82 participants in this trial indicated that
the primary predictor of better outcomes was whether the individual received the same intervention across both phases, irrespective of
what this was (Frank et al., 1999). The analysis of the full trial data set over 2-year follow-up had different findings (Frank et al., 2005).
This showed that there was longer time to relapse in individuals who received IPSRT during the acute treatment phase irrespective of what
treatment was offered during maintenance. The two subsequent studies have focused on individuals with acute depression at recruitment.
Miklowitz and colleagues (2007) compared IPSRT with collaborative clinical management and other structured psychotherapies (CBT and

FFT) in 293 participants with either bipolar I or II disorder. Although structured psychological therapies overall were associated with better
and faster rates of recovery over the 12-month study period, there were no differences between the therapy types. This study did not
report on impact on relapse to depressed or manic episodes. A smaller study by Swartz et al. (2012) compared IPSRT with quetiapine in 25
individuals with a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder who were currently depressed. Individuals were either withdrawn from medication in the
week prior to study baseline measures (N = 6) or were routinely medication-free. Over 12-week follow-up both groups improved on measures
of depression and mania with no group differences.

Family focused treatment (FFT)
Expressed emotion (EE; Leff & Vaughan, 1985) can be seen as an indication of the emotional environment the client lives in, normally at
home. It is measured by the Camberwell Family Interview (Vaughan & Leff, 1976), which assesses criticism, hostility (over-generalisation of
criticism or rejection), emotional over-involvement (overprotection or over-devotion) and warmth. Typically if one relative is rated as high-
EE, the client is seen as living in a high-EE environment. Similar to findings from research on EE and schizophrenia, high levels of criticism
or emotional over-involvement in parents or spouses lead to poor outcomes in terms of relapses or poor symptomatic outcome in bipolar
disorder (Honig et al., 1997; Miklowitz et al., 1988; O'Connell et al., 1991; Priebe et al., 1989).

FFT was based on the finding that bipolar clients in a high-EE environment fared worse than bipolar clients in a low-EE environment.
In particular, people who return home following hospitalisation to families with high expressed emotion attitudes (including criticism,
hostility or emotional over-involvement) are 2-3 times more likely to relapse in the 9 months following admission than people in low
expressed emotion families (Miklowitz, 2004, 2007).

Miklowitz (2008) developed family focused treatment that was designed for people who had stabilised following a recent manic or
depressive episode (with or without hospitalisation) and were living or in close association with caregiving family members, usually parents
or spouses.

The programme consists of psychoeducation about bipolar disorder, family communication training and problem-solving skills training
(Milkowitz, 2008, 2011). Crowe et al. (2010) conducted a systematic review of the effectiveness of psychosocial interventions for bipolar
disorder. Nine studies were examined in the family intervention category and they argued that the series of studies by Miklowitz et al. (2000,
2003) indicated improved outcomes for FFT. Miklowitz et al. (2000) found that individuals who had received FFT had fewer relapses and
longer delays before the onset of an episode. They showed greater improvements in depressive but not manic symptoms. At follow-up they
had fewer relapses, longer intervals between relapses, greater reductions in mood symptoms and better medication adherence (Miklowitz
et al., 2003). The review of FFT for the NICE guidelines (NICE, 2014) concluded that there was some evidence for FFT being effective in
improving depressive symptoms and possible impact of hospitalisation. However this review did not find reliable evidence as yet for impact
of FFT on relapse prevention or mania symptoms.
FFT involves 21 sessions over 9 months: 12 weekly sessions, 6 fortnightly sessions, and 3 monthly sessions (Miklowitz, 2008). Clients,
their partners, siblings, parents and older children may all be included in sessions, although often it is a couple who attends. The programme
begins after symptoms have abated and the client is being maintained on mood-stabilising medication following a hypomanic episode. A
contract to complete the programme is framed as an opportunity for the family or couples to understand bipolar disorder; to accept the
concept of vulnerability to relapses; to accept the need for maintenance on mood-stabilising medication; to distinguish the person from the
bipolar disorder; to recognise and cope with stressful situations that may precipitate relapses; and to re-establish a supportive relationship
after the episode. An assessment of the family is conducted to determine their understanding of bipolar disorder, their capacity for clear
communication, their problem-solving skills, and the degree to which they can avoid becoming embroiled in stressful patterns of interaction
characterised by either criticism or over-involvement. A framework for couples assessment is given in Chapter 6.
Following assessment, which may span between two and four sessions, psychoeducation becomes the main focus until about session 10.
The family is given detailed information about the symptoms, course, relapse pattern, probable causes and multimodal treatment of bipolar
disorder. In some families the non-symptomatic partner over-identifies the person with the illness, becomes over-involved and treats the

bipolar patient as an invalid. In other families, the non-symptomatic partner treats the patient in a critical, aggressive way, doubting the
reality of the disorder and blaming the patient for acting so irresponsibly. During psychoeducation, the therapist conveys that bipolar
disorder is a challenge that the family must come to understand and cope with together, in the same way that families manage other
medical challenges like diabetes. Adherence to medication regimes and avoidance of major life stresses that might precipitate relapse are
given attention during psychoeducation. This information is given within the context of a formulation specific to the client and the families'
strengths and vulnerabilities. As part of psychoeducation, the family write a relapse drill in which they specify the patient's prodromal signs
of relapse and a list of 'who will do what' when these occur.
The next seven sessions are devoted to communication enhancement training. Here families are coached in how to send clear
unambiguous messages, to make clear statements, to make clear requests, to listen in an active empathic way and to check that accurate
understanding has occurred. Communication enhancement training is offered to families as a way of avoiding the sorts of relationship
tension that can lead to relapses. Where family members have an overly critical or overly involved relational style and typically engage in
communication where there is rapid turn-taking and little thought to what is said or the accuracy of what is understood, communication
enhancement training can slow this stressful process down.
The next few sessions focus on helping families identify and define family problems in solvable terms, and then systematically select,
plan, implement and evaluate these solutions. Common problems addressed during this part of therapy include how to manage daily or
weekly routines, how to manage finances, and how to plan leisure time. Problem-solving skills training offers families a way to reduce
stress by making their attempts at solving family problems more predictable, more cooperative and more effective. A detailed account of
communication and problem-solving skills training is given in Chapter 6.
In later sessions, the use of communication and problem-solving skills is reviewed and relapse management is discussed. When reviewing
the use of communication and problem-solving skills, the emphasis is on pinpointing and building on families' strengths, and treating
setbacks as new challenges that may be addressed with the families' strengths. With relapse management, the focus is on helping families

articulate and 'own' what they have learned about bipolar disorder, the importance of medication adherence, the importance of stress
management, the necessity for clear communication and systematic joint problem solving, and how they will recognise and manage
prodromal signs associated with relapse. Families are also referred at the end of therapy to support groups for people with bipolar disorder
and their families.
Summary
Bipolar disorder is characterised by episodes of mania or hypomania and depression. There are two primary subtypes: bipolar I disorder,
with at least one manic episode or mixed episode and one major depressive episode; and bipolar II disorder, with at least one hypomanic
episode and one major depressive episode but no manic or mixed episodes. Bipolar disorder is relatively common, with prevalence rate of 1-
1.9% in Europe and the US. While bipolar disorder was historically viewed as a condition with periods of mania and depression interspersed
with periods of 'normality', recent evidence suggests that clients experience high levels of symptoms between episodes, are at high risk of
relapse and have substantial social problems. A client who has recovered from a bipolar mood episode has a 50% risk of having a further
episode within a year and the course of bipolar disorder can become more severe over time. Bipolar disorder is associated with high risk of
self-harm and suicide, with an estimated annual rate of suicide of 0.4%, 20 times higher than in the general population. Family studies
indicate substantially higher risk for relatives of bipolar clients to develop the disorder than the general population. Common comorbid
conditions include personality disorders, particularly in the B and C clusters, alcohol and substance misuse and anxiety disorders. The
presence of personality disorder is commonly associated with greater illness severity including higher risk of self-harm and suicide and
poorer outcome. Coexistence of any of these disorders is associated with poorer therapeutic outcomes due to more difficulties with
therapeutic engagement, higher levels of symptomatology and more frequent hospitalisations. Gathering information from the client
during assessment is a prerequisite for treatment planning, as well as an opportunity to come to a shared understanding with the client of


how the disorder affects the client. A careful interview with the client will cover family history of mental health difficulties and the effects
of these on the client, illness history and the relationship between life events and symptoms, and the client's views on diagnosis and
medication. Assessment of current mood state, coping with early warning signs, personal recovery, hopelessness and suicidality, quality of
life, the client's social skills and sources of professional and informal support may also be made at interview and through the use of self-
monitoring forms, standardised self-report and observer measures. There are four evidence-based psychological treatments for bipolar
disorder which are offered in conjunction with mood-stabilising medication. These are: complex psychoeducation, cognitive-behaviour
therapy (CBT), interpersonal social rhythm therapy (IPSRT) and family focused treatment (FFT). Complex psychoeducation incorporates
information giving, problem-solving techniques and detection of early warning signs. CBT is based on the assumption that thinking, mood
and behaviour affect each other. The therapist aims to work with the client on techniques to monitor, examine and change unhelpful
patterns of thinking and behaviour associated with undesirable mood states. Initial work on engaging the client is followed by goal setting
and working with cognitive techniques towards goals around symptom reduction, longer-term life goals, medication adherence, building
social networks, challenging dysfunctional beliefs, increasing structure and routine, moderating risky behaviours and identifying and
responding effectively to prodromes or signs of relapse. The recently developed recovery-focused CBT approach takes a broader approach of
applying CBT strategies to the goals valued by the client, which typically include both functional and mood-related outcomes. IPSRT is based
on the premise that bipolar disorder is characterised by a particular sensitivity to (1) circadian disturbance which impacts on sleep patterns
and (2) interpersonal stresses. Both of these trigger episodes of mood disturbance. IPSRT helps clients to monitor and stabilise patterns of
sleep and activity and address interpersonal stresses. FFT is based on the finding that bipolar clients in a family environment of high EE
characterised by criticism, hostility and over-involvement fare worse than bipolar clients in a low-EE environment. After a bipolar episode,
in FFT families are offered psychoeducation about the illness, communication training and problem-solving skills training.


Exercises
For each of these exercises, work in pairs with one person taking the role of a client with bipolar disorder and the other taking the role of the
therapist.
Engagement and goal setting
The client is an individual referred for CBT for bipolar disorder. However, the client's main priority is to 'get well' so that they can re-establish
a relationship that broke down with a partner 6 months ago when the client was high. The therapist's task is to assess whether it is possible
to agree on symptom and functional goals that would permit engagement with CBT.
This exercise illustrates the process of negotiating realistic goals as part of the engagement process. It highlights that many clients do not
appear at initial sessions with clearly defined symptom goals.
Working with elevated mood
The therapist has known the client for two or three sessions and currently engagement is only partial. The therapist notices as the session
progresses that the client's mood is elevated and the client mentions that they have stopped taking lithium. The therapist uses CBT
techniques to encourage the client to moderate activity levels, engage in calming activities and restart lithium. However, the client feels
great, thinks they are fine and that the current mood change is a great opportunity to make up for lost time.
Feedback to the facilitator on the processes, cognitions and emotions associated with being in the roles of client and therapist. This
exercise illustrates the importance of shared formulation and proper collaborative relationship to achieve change.


Identifying early warning signs and using the card-sort technique
The therapist and client brainstorm a list of possible early warning signs for mania. Once all possible signs have been elicited, these are each
separately written onto index cards. The client and therapist work together to identify early, middle and late signs as the client allocates
cards to each category. The client is encouraged to estimate the duration of early, middle and late stages.
This task illustrates the need to have an in-depth, shared knowledge of the client's experience if early warnings signs are to be elicited and
ordered in a meaningful manner. The client experience of attempting to order signs is important in understanding why some individuals
might not find this easy to do. This also shows how, for most people, early signs are normally relatively mild and changeable, whilst later
signs are more severe and require more intensive professional input.
Evidence summaries
Jones, S. H. (2004). A review of psychotherapeutic interventions for bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 80, 101-114.
Keck, P., & McElroy, S. (2007). Pharmacological treatments for bipolar disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments
That Work (Third Edition, pp. 323-350). New York: Oxford University Press.
Lam, D. H., Burbeck, R., Wright, K., & Pilling, S. (2009). Psychological therapies in bipolar disorder: The effect of illness history on relapse
prevention-Systematic review. Bipolar Disorders, 11, 474-482.
Miklowitz, D., & Craighead, W. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for bipolar disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to
Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 309-323). New York: Oxford University Press.
Morriss, R. K., Faizal, M. A., Jones, A. P., Williamson, P. R., Bolton, C., & McCarthy, J. P. (2007). Interventions for helping people recognise
early signs of recurrence in bipolar disorder. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2007, CD004854.

NICE. (2014). Bipolar Disorder: The Assessment and Management of Bipolar Disorder in Adults, Children and Young People in Primary and
Secondary Care (Clinical Guideline 185). London: Author.
Further reading for practitioners
Colom, F., Vieta, E., & Scott, J. (2006). Psychoeducation Manual for Bipolar Disorder. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Frank, E. (2005). Treating Bipolar Disorder: A Clinician's Guide to Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy. New York: Guilford.
Lam, D., Jones, S., & Hayward, P. (2010). Cognitive Therapy for Bipolar Disorder. A Therapist's Guide to Concepts, Methods and Practice
(Second Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
Miklowitz, D. (2008). Bipolar Disorder: A Family-Focused Treatment Approach (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Newman, C., Leahy, R., Beck, A., Reilly-Harrington, N., & Gyulai, L. (2002). Bipolar Disorder: A Cognitive Therapy: Approach. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Otto, M., Reilly-Harrington, N., Kogan, J., Henin, A., & Kanuz, R. O. (2008). Managing Bipolar Disorder: Therapist Guide: A Cognitive-
Behavioural Approach: A Cognitive-Behavioural Treatment Program (Treatments That Work). New York: Oxford University Press.
Otto, M., Reilly-Harrington, N., Kogan, J., Hennin, A., & Knauz, R. (1999). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Bipolar Disorder: Treatment
Manual. Boston: Massachusetts General Hospital.
Further reading for clients
Jamison, K. (1995). An Unquiet Mind. London: Picador (Autobiographical account by psychologist).
Jones, S. H., Hayward, P., & Lam, D. H. (2003). Coping with Bipolar Disorder (Second Edition). Oxford: Oneworld.


Miklowitz, D. J. (2011). The Bipolar Disorder Survival Guide: What You and Your Family Need to Know (Second Edition). New York: Guilford
Press.
Owen, S., & Saunders, A. (2008). Bipolar Disorder: The Ultimate Guide. Oxford: Oneworld.
Scott, J. (2010). Overcoming Mood Swings: A Self-Help Guide Using Cognitive-Behavioural Techniques. London: Robinson.
Assessment instruments
Altman, E., Hedeker, D., Janicak, P., Peterson, J., & Davis, J. (1994). The Clinician Administered Rating Scale for Mania (CARS-M).
Development reliability and validity. Biological Psychiatry, 36, 124-134.
Bauer, M. S., Crits-Cristoph, P., Ball, W. A., Dewees, E., McAllister, T., Alahi, P., Cacciola, J., & Whybrow, P. (1991). Independent assessment
of manic and depressive symptoms by self-rating: Scale characteristics and implications for the study of mania. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 48(9), 807-812.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1988). Beck Hopelessness Scale. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Dausch, B., Milkowitz, D., & Richards, J. (1996). A scale for the global assessment of relational functioning. II. Reliability and validity in a
sample of families of bipolar patients. Family Process, 35, 175-189.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurology and Psychiatry, 23, 59-62.
Jones, S., Mulligan, L.D., Higginson, S., Dunn, G., & Morrison, A. P. (2012). Bipolar Recovery Questionnaire: Psychometric properties of a
quantitative measure of recovery experiences in bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 147(1-3), 34-43.


Lobban, F., Solis-Trapala, I., Symes, W., Morriss, R. & ERP Group (2011). Early Warning Signs Checklists for Bipolar Depression and Mania:
utility, reliability and validity. Journal of Affective Disorders, 133, 413-422.
Michalak, E. E., Murray, G., & Crest, B. D. (2010). Development of the QoL.BD: A disorder-specific scale to assess quality of life in bipolar
disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 12, 727-740.
Monk, T., Flaherty, J., Frank, E., Hoskinson, K., & Kupfer, D. (1990). The Social Rhythm Metric: An instrument to quantify the daily
rhythms of life. Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, 178, 120-126.

References
Alloy, L. Y., Urosevic, S., Walshaw, P. D., Nusslock, R., & Neeren, A. M. (2005). The psychosocial context of bipolar disorder:
Environmental, cognitive, and developmental risk factors. Clinical Psychology Review, 8, 1043-1075.
Altman, E., Hedeker, D., Janicak, P., Peterson, J., & Davis, J. (1994). The Clinician Administered Rating Scale for Mania (CARS-M).
Development reliability and validity. Biological Psychiatry, 36, 124-134.
Ambelas, A. (1987). Life events and mania. A special relationship? British Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 235-240.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition-Text Revision, DSM-IV-
TR). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2010). American Psychiatric Association Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with Bipolar
Disorder (Second Edition). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA:
Author.


Andreasen, N. C., Grove, W. M., Shapiro, R. W., Keller, M. B., & Hirschfeld, R. M. (1981). Reliability of lifetime diagnosis. A multicenter
collaborative perspective. Archives of General Psychiatry, 38(4), 400-405.
Angst, F., Stassen, H. H., Clayton, P. J., & Angst, J. (2002). Mortality of patients with mood disorders: follow-up over 34-38 years. Journal
of Affective Disorders, 68(2-3), 167-181.
Angst, J., Gamma, A. Benazzi, F., Ajdacic, V., Eich, D., & Roessler, W. (2003). Toward a re-definition of subthreshold bipolarity:
Epidemiology and proposed criteria for bipolar-II, minor bipolar disorders and hypomania. Journal of Affective Disorders, 73(1-2), 133-
146.
Baldessarini, R. J., Tondo, L., Vazquez, G. H., Undurraga, J., Bolzani, L., Yildiz, A., Khalsa, H. M., Lai, M., Lepri, B., Lolich, M., Maffei, P.
M., Salvatore, P., Faedda, G. L., Vieta, E., & Tohen, M. (2012). Age 17 at onset versus family history and clinical outcomes in 1,665
international bipolar-I 18 disorder patients. World Psychiatry, 11, 40-46.
Ball, J. R., Mitchell, P. B., Corry, J. C., Skillecorn, A., Smith, M., & Malhi, G. S. (2006). A randomised controlled trial of cognitive therapy for
bipolar disorder: Focus on long term change. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 277-286.
Basco, M. R., & Rush, A. J. (1996). Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for Bipolar Disorder. New York: Guilford.
Bauer, M. S., Crits-Christoph, P., Ball, W. A., Dewees, E., McAllister, T., Alahi, P., Cacciola, J., & Whybrow, P. (1991). Independent assessment
of manic and depressive symptoms by self-rating. Scale characteristics and implications for the study of mania. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 48(9), 807-812.
Bauer, M. S., Vojta, C., Kinostan, B., Altshuler, L., & Glick, H. (2000). The Internal State Scale: replication of its discriminating abilities in a
multisite, public sector sample. Bipolar Disorders, 2(4), 340-346.
Bebbington, P., & Ramana, R. (1995). The epidemiology of bipolar affective disorder. Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology, 30(6),
279-292.


Bebbington, P., Wilkins, S., Jones, P., Foerster, A., Murray, R., Toone, B., & Lewis, S. (1993). Life events and psychosis: Initial results from
the Camberwell Collaborative Psychosis studies. British Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 72-79.
Bech, P., Rafaelsen, O. J., Kramp, P., & Bolwig, T. (1978). The mania rating scale: Scale construction and inter-observer agreement.
Neuropharmacology, 17(6), 430-431.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1987). Beck Depression Inventory. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1988). Beck Hopelessness Scale. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A.T., Steer, R.A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., Kovacs, M., & Garrison, B. (1985). Hopelessness and eventual suicide: A 10-year prospective study of patients
hospitalized with suicidal ideation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 142(5), 559-563.
Boland, E. M., Bender, R. E., Alloy, L. B., Conner, B. T., LaBelle, D. R., & Abramson, L. Y. (2012). Life events and social rhythms in bipolar
spectrum disorders: An examination of social rhythm sensitivity. Journal of Affective Disorders, 139, 264-272.
Calabrese, J. R., Shelton, M. D., Rapport, D. J., Kimmel, S. E., & Elhaj, O. (2002). Long-term treatment of bipolar disorder with lamotrigine.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 63 (Suppl. 10), 18-22.
Cassidy, F., Ahearn, E. P., & Carroll, B. J. (2001). Substance abuse in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 3(4), 181-188.
Clements, C., Morriss, R., Jones, S., Peters, S., Roberts, C., & Kapur, N. (2013). Suicide in bipolar disorder in a national English sample,
1996-2009: incidence, trends, and characteristics. Psychological Medicine, 43, 2593-2602.
Colom, F., Vieta, E., Martinez-Aran, A., Reinares, M., Goikolea, J., Benabarre, A., Torrent, C., Comes, M., Corbella, B., Parramon, G., &
Corominas, J. (2003). A randomized trial on the efficacy of group psychoeducation in the prophylaxis of recurrences in bipolar patients
whose disease is in remission. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(4), 402-407.


Colom, F., Vieta, E., Sánchez-Moreno, J., Palomino-Otiniano, R., Reinares, M., Goikolea, J. M., Benabarre, A., & Martínez-Arán, A. (2009).
Group psychoeducation for stabilised bipolar disorders: 5-year outcome of a randomised clinical trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 194,
260-265.
Colom, F., Vieta, E., & Scott, J. (2006). Psychoeducation Manual for Bipolar Disorder. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Craddock, N., & Jones, I. (2001). Molecular genetics of bipolar disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, Suppl. 41, S128-S133.
Crowe, M., Whitehead, L., Wilson, L., Carlyle, D., O'Brien, A., Inder, M., & Joyce, P. (2010). Disorder-specific psychosocial interventions for
bipolar disorder-A systematic review of the evidence for mental health nursing practice. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 47,
896-908.
Feske, U., Frank, E., Mallinger, A. G., Houck, P. R., Fagiolini, A., Shear, M. K., Grochocinski, V. J., & Kupfer, D. J. (2000). Anxiety as a correlate
of response to the acute treatment of bipolar I disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 956-962.
Frank, E. (1999). Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy prevents depressive symptomatology in bipolar 1 patient. Bipolar Disorder, 1
(Suppl. 1), 13.
Frank, E. (2005). Treating Bipolar Disorder: A Clinician's Guide to Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy. New York: Guilford.
Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Thase, M. E., Mallinger, A. G., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., Grochocinski, V., Houck, P., Scott, J., Thompson, W.,
& Monk, T. (2005). Two-year outcomes for Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy in individuals with bipolar I disorder. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 62, 996-1004.
Frank, E., Swartz, H. A., Mallinger, A. G., Thase, M. E., Weaver, E. V., & Kupfer, D. J. (1999). Adjunctive psychotherapy for bipolar disorder
effects of changing treatment modality. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 579-587.
George, E. L., Miklowitz, D. J., Richards, J. A., Simoneau, T. L., & Taylor, D. O. (2003). The comorbidity of bipolar disorders and axis-II
personality disorders: Prevalence and clinical correlates. Bipolar Disorders, 5(2), 115-122.


Gershon, E. S., Berrettini, W. H., Nurnberger, J. I., & Goldin, L. R. (1989). Genetic studies of affective illness. In J. J. Mann (Ed.), Models of
Depressive Disorders: Psychological, Biological, and Genetic Perspectives. The Depressive Illness Series (pp. 109-142). New York: Springer.
Gnanadesikan, M., Freeman, M. P., & Gelenberg, A. J. (2003). Alternatives to lithium and divalproex in the maintenance treatment of
bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorder 5(3), 203-216.
Goodwin, F. K., & Jamison, K. (1990). Manic-Depressive Illness. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goodwin, G. M. (2003). Evidence-based guidelines for treating bipolar disorder: recommendations from the British Association for
Psychopharmacology. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 17(2), 149-173; discussion 147.
Grunze, H., Kasper, S., Goodwin, G., Bowden, C., Baldwin, D., Licht, R., Vieta, E., Möller, H., & WFSBP Task Force on Treatment Guidelines
for Bipolar Disorders. (2002). World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) guidelines for biological treatment of
bipolar disorders. Part I: Treatment of bipolar depression. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 3(3), 115-124.
Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurology and Psychiatry, 23, 59-62.
Honig, A., Hofman, A., Rozendaal, N., & Dingemans, P. (1997). Psycho-education in bipolar disorder: Effect on expressed emotion.
Psychiatry Research, 72(1), 17-22.
Johnson, S. L., & Roberts, J. E. (1995). Life events and bipolar disorder: implications from biological theories. Psychology Bulletin, 117(3),
434-449.
Jones, S. (2002). Cognitive behaviour therapy in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorder, 4(4), 275.
Jones, S., McGrath, E., Hampshire, K., Owens, R., Riste, L., Roberts, C., Davies, L., & Mayes, D. (2013). A randomised controlled trial of time
limited CBT informed psychological therapy for anxiety in bipolar disorder. BMC Psychiatry, 13, 54.
Jones, S., Mulligan, L. D., Higginson, S., Dunn, G., & Morrison, A. P. (2012). Bipolar Recovery Questionnaire: psychometric properties of a
quantitative measure of recovery experiences in bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 147(1-3), 34-43.


Jones, S. H., Smith, G., Mulligan, L., Lobban, F., Law, H., Dunn, G., Welford, M., Kelly, J., Mulligan, J., & Morrison, A. (2015). Recovery
focused CBT for individuals with recent onset bipolar disorder: A randomised controlled pilot trial. British Journal of Psychiatry.
doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.113.141259
Joseph, J. (2003). The Gene Illusion. Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.
Joyce, P. R. (1985). Illness behaviour and rehospitalization in bipolar affective disorder. Psychological Medicine, 15(3), 521-525.
Judd, L., Akiskal, H. S., Schettler, P., Coryell, W., Endicott, J., Maser, J. D., Solomon, D. A., Leon, A. C., & Keller, M. B. (2003). A prospective
investigation of the natural history of the long term weekly symptomatic status of bipolar II disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60,
261-269.
Judd, L., Akiskal, H. S., Schettler, P., Endicott, J., Maser, J., Solomon, D. A., Leon, A. C., Rice, J. A., & Keller, M. B. (2002). The long term natural
history of the weekly symptomatic status of bipolar I disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 530-537.
Kennedy, S., Thompson, R., Stancer, H. C., Roy, A., & Persad, E. (1983). Life events precipitating mania. British Journal of Psychiatry, 142,
398-403.
Kessing, L. V., Hansen, M. G., Andersen, P. K., & Angst, J. (2004). The predictive effect of episodes on the risk of recurrence in depressive
and bipolar disorders—A life-long perspective. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 109, 339-344
Kinderman, P., & Lobban, F. (2000). Evolving formulations. Sharing complex information with clients. Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 28(3), 307-310.
Klerman, G. L., Weissman, M. M., Rounsaville, B., & Chevron, E. S. (1984). Interpersonal Psychotherapy of Depression. New York: Basic
Books.
Kusumakar, V. (2002). Antidepressants and antipsychotics in the long-term treatment of bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
63 (Suppl. 10), 23-28.


Kutcher, S. P., Marton, P., & Korenblum, M. (1990). Adolescent bipolar illness and personality disorder. Journal of the American Academy
of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 29(3), 355-358.
Lam, D. (2006). What can we conclude from studies on psychotherapy in bipolar disorder?. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 188(4), 321-
322.
Lam, D. H., Hayward, P., Watkins, E. R., Wright, K., & Sham, P. (2005). Relapse prevention in patients 43 with bipolar disorder: Cognitive
therapy outcome after 2 years. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 324-329.
Lam, D., Jones, S., & Hayward, P. (2010). Cognitive Therapy for Bipolar Disorder: A Therapist's Guide to Concepts, Methods and Practice
(Second Edition). Chichester: John Wiley.
Lam, D. H., Watkins, E. R., Hayward, P., Bright, J., Wright, K., Kerr, N., Parr-Davis, G., & Sham, P. (2003). A randomized controlled study
of cognitive therapy for relapse prevention for bipolar affective disorder: outcome of the first year. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(2),
145-152.
Lam, D., & Wong, G. (1997). Prodromes, coping strategies, insight and social functioning in bipolar affective disorders. Psychological
Medicine, 27(5), 1091-1100.
Lam, D., Wong, G., & Sham, P. (2001). Prodromes, coping strategies and course of illness in bipolar affective disorder-A naturalistic
study. Psychological Medicine, 31(8), 1397-1402.
Lam, D., Wright, K., & Smith, N. (2004). Dysfunctional assumptions in bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 79(1-3), 193-199.
Leff, J., & Vaughan, C. (1985). Expressed Emotion in Families: Its significance for Mental Illness. New York: Guilford.
Lenzenweger, M. F., Lane, M. C., Loranger, A. W., & Kessler, R C. (2007). DSM-IV personality disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 62, 553-564.


Leverich, G. S., Altshuler, L. L., Frye, M. A., Suppes, T., Keck, P. E., McElroy, S. L., Denicoff, K. D., Obrocea, G., Nolen, W. A., Kupka, R., Walden,
J., Grunze, H., Perez, S., Luckenbaugh, D. A, & Post, R. M. (2003). Factors associated with suicide attempts in 648 patients with bipolar
disorder in the Stanley Foundation Bipolar Network. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64(5), 506-515.
Lobban, F., Solis-Trapala, I., Symes, W., Morriss, R., & ERP Group (2011). Early Warning Signs Checklists for Bipolar Depression and
Mania: utility, reliability and validity. Journal of Affective Disorders, 133, 413-422.
Lobban, F., Taylor, L., Chandler, E., Tyler, E., Kinderman, P., Kolamunnage-Donna, R., Gamble, C., Peters, S., Pontin, E., Sellwood, W., &
Morriss, R. (2010). Enhanced relapse prevention for bipolar disorder by community mental health teams: Cluster feasibility randomised
trial. British Journal of Psychiatry 196(1):59-63.
Maj, M. (2003). The effect of lithium in bipolar disorder: a review of recent research evidence. Bipolar Disorder, 5(3), 180-188.
Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B., Sherrill, J. T., Siegel, L., Patterson, D., & Kupfer, D. J. (1998). Stressful life events and social
rhythm disruption in the onset of manic and depressive bipolar episodes: a preliminary investigation. Archives of General Psychiatry,
55(8), 702-707.
McGuffin, P., Rijsdijk, F., Andrew, M., Sham, P., Katz, R., & Cardno, A. (2003). The heritability of bipolar affective disorder and the genetic
relationship to unipolar depression. Archives of Genera; Psychiatry, 60(5), 497-502.
McIntyre, R. S., Soczynska, J. K., Bottas, A., Bordbar, K., Konarski, J. Z., & Kennedy, S. H. (2006). Anxiety disorders and bipolar disorder: a
review. Bipolar Disorders, 8(6), 665-676.
Merikangas, K. R., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J., Greenberg, P. E., Hirshfield, R. M., Petukhova, M., & Kessler, R. (2007). Lifetime and 12 month
prevalence of bipolar spectrum disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 543-552.
Meyer, T. D., & Hautzinger, M. (2012). Cognitive behaviour therapy and supportive therapy for bipolar disorders: Relapse rates for
treatment period and 2-year follow-up. Psychological Medicine, 42 (07), 1429-1439.

Michalak, E. E., Murray, G., & Crest, B. D. (2010). Development of the QoL.BD: A disorder-specific scale to assess quality of life in bipolar
disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 12(7), 727-740.
Miklowitz, D. J. (2004). The role of family systems in severe and recurrent psychiatric disorders: a developmental psychopathology view.
Development and Psychopathology, 16, 667-688.
Miklowitz, D. J. (2007). The role of the family in the course and treatment of bipolar disorder. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
16, 192-196.
Miklowitz, D. (2008). Bipolar Disorder: A Family-Focused Treatment Approach (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Miklowitz, D. J. (2011). The Bipolar Disorder Survival Guide: What You and Your Family Need to Know (Second Edition). New York: Guilford
Press.
Miklowitz, D. J., George, E. L. Richards, J. A., Simoneau, T. L., & Suddath, R. L. (2003). A randomized study of family-focused
psychoeducation and pharmacotherapy in the outpatient management of bipolar disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(9), 904-
912.
Miklowitz, D. J., Goldstein, M. J., Nuechterlein, K. H., & Snyder, K. S., & Mintz, J. (1988). Family factors and the course of bipolar affective
disorder. Archives General Psychiatry, 45, 225-231.
Miklowitz, D. J., Otto, M. W., Frank, E., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Wisniewski, S. R., Kogan, J. N., Nierenberg, A. A., Calabrese, J. R., Marangell,
L. B., Gyulai, L., Araga, M., Gonzalez, J. M., Shirley, E. R., Thase, M. E., & Sachs, G. S. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for bipolar depression:
A 1-year randomized trial from the systematic treatment enhancement program. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 419-427.
Miklowitz, D., Simoneau, T. L., George, E. L., Richards, J. A., Kalbag, A., Sachs-Ericsson, N., & Suddath, R. (2000). Family focused treatment
of bipolar disorder: 1 year effects of a psychoeducational program in conjunction with pharmacotherapy. Biological Psychiatry, 48, 582-
592.


Molnar, G., Feeney, M. G., & Fava, G. A. (1988). Duration and symptoms of bipolar prodromes. American Journal of Psychiatry, 145(12),
1576-1578.
Moncrieff, J. (1995). Lithium revisited: A re-examination of the placebo controlled trials of lithium prophylaxis in manic depressive
disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 569-574.
Morriss, R., Lobban, F., Jones, S., Riste, L., Peters, S., Roberts, C., Davies, L., & Mayes, D. (2011). Pragmatic randomised controlled trial of
group psychoeducation versus group support in the maintenance of bipolar disorder. BMC Psychiatry, 11, 114.
Morriss, R., Yang, M., Chopra, A., Bentall, R., Paykel, E., & Scott, J. (2013). Differential effects of depression and mania symptoms on social
adjustment: prospective observational study in bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 15, 80-91.
NICE. (2014). Bipolar Disorder: The Assessment and Management of Bipolar Disorder in Adults, Children and Young People in Primary and
Secondary Care (Clinical Guideline 185). London: National Institute of Clinical Excellence.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991). Responses to depression and their effects on the duration of depressed mood. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 100, 569-582.
O'Connell, R. A., Mayo, J. A. Flatow, L., Cuthbertson, B., & O'Brien, B. (1991). Outcome of bipolar disorder on long-term treatment with
lithium. British Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 123-129.
Otto, M. W., Simon, N. M., Wisniewski, S. R., Miklowitz, D. J., Kogan, J. N., Reilly-Harrington, N. A., Frank, E., Nierenberg, A. A., Marangell,
L. B., Sagduyu, K., Weiss, R. D., Miyahara, S., Thase, M. E., Sachs, G. S., & Pollack, M. H. (2006). Prospective 12-month course of bipolar
disorder in out-patients with and without comorbid anxiety disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 20-25.
Perris, H. (1984). Life events and depression: Part 2. Results in diagnostic subgroups and in relation to the recurrence of depression.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 7, 25-36.
Perry, A., Tarrier, N., Morriss, R., McCarthy, E., & Limb, K. (1999). Randomised controlled trial of efficacy of teaching patients with bipolar
disorder to identify early symptoms of relapse and obtain treatment. British Medical Journal, 318, 149-153.


Post, R., Denicoff, K., & Leverich, G. (2003). Morbidity in 258 bipolar outpatients followed for 1 year with daily prospective ratings on the
NIMH life chart method. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64, 680-690.
Post, R., Rubinow, D. R., & Ballenger, J. C. (1986). Conditioning and sensitisation in the longitudinal course of affective illness. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 191-201.
Priebe, S., Wildgrube, C., & Mueller-Oerlinghausen, B (1989). Lithium prophylaxis and expressed emotion. British Journal of Psychiatry,
154, 396-399.
Prien, R. F., & Potter, W. Z. (1990). NIMH workshop report on treatment of bipolar disorder. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 26(4), 409-427.
Provencher, M. D., Hawke, L. D., & Thienot, E. (2011). Psychotherapies for comorbid anxiety in bipolar spectrum disorders. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 133(3), 371-380.
Regier, D. A., Farmer, M. E., Rae, D., Locke, B., Keith, S., Judd, L., & Goodwin, F. (1990). Comorbidity of mental disorders with alcohol and
other drug abuse: Results from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 264, 2511-
2518.
Rice, J. P., Rochberg, N., Endicott, J., & Lavori, P. W., & Miller, C. (1992). Stability of psychiatric diagnoses. An application to the affective
disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49(10), 824-830.
Rucci, P., Frank, E., Kostelnik, B., Fagiolini, A., Mallinger, A. G., Swartz, H. A., Thase, M., Siegel, L., Wilson, D., & Kupfer, D. J. (2002). Suicide
attempts in patients with bipolar I disorder during acute and maintenance phases of intensive treatment with pharmacotherapy and
adjunctive psychotherapy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(7), 1160–1164.
Samuels, J. (2011). Personality disorders: Epidemiology and public health issues. International Review of Psychiatry, 23, 223-233.
Scott, J., Garland, A., & Moorhead, S. (2001). A pilot study of cognitive therapy in bipolar disorders. Psychological Medicine, 31(3), 459-
467.


Scott, J., Paykel, E., Morriss, R., Bentall, R., Kinderman, P., Johnson, T., Abbott, R., & Hayhurst, H. (2006). Cognitive-behavioural therapy
for severe and recurrent bipolar disorders: Randomised controlled trial. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 188(4), 313-320.
Simpson, S. G., McMahon, F. J., McInnis, M. G., MacKinnon, D. F., Edwin, D., Folstein, S. E., & DePaulo, R. (2002). Diagnostic reliability of
bipolar II disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59(8), 736-740.
Smith, J. A., & Tarrier, N. (1992). Prodromal symptoms in manic depressive psychosis. Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology, 27(5),
245-248.
Solomon, D. A., Keitner, G. I., Miller, I. W., Shea, M. T., & Keller, M. (1995). Course of illness and maintenance treatments for patients with
bipolar disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 56(1), 5-13.
Strakowski, S. M., & DelBello, M. P. (2000). The co-occurrence of bipolar and substance use disorders. Clinical Psychology Review, 20(2),
191-206.
Swann, A. C., Secunda, S. K., Stokes, P. E., Croughan, J., Davis, J., Koslow, S., & Maas, J. (1990). Stress, depression and mania: Relationship
between perceived role of stressful events and clinical and biochemical characteristics. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 81, 389-397.
Swartz, H. A., Frank, E., & Cheng, Y. (2012). A randomized pilot study of psychotherapy and quetiapine for the acute treatment of bipolar
II depression. Bipolar Disorders, 14, 211-216.
Sylvia, L. G., Alloy, L. B., Hafner, J. A., Gauger, M. C., Verdon, K., & Abramson, L. Y. (2009). Life events and social rhythms in bipolar
spectrum disorders: A prospective study. Behavior Therapy, 40, 131-141.
Ten Have, M., Vollebergh, W., Bijl, R., & Nolen, W. A. (2002). Bipolar disorder in the general population in The Netherlands (prevalence,
consequences and care utilisation): results from The Netherlands Mental Health Survey and Incidence Study (NEMESIS). Journal of
Affective Disorders, 68(2-3), 203-213.
Tondo, L., Isacsson, G., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2003). Suicidal behaviour in bipolar disorder: risk and prevention. Central Nervous System
Drugs, 17(7), 491-511.


Vaughan, C., & Leff, J. (1976). The measurement of expressed emotion in the families of schizophrenic patients. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 15, 157-165.
Visscher, P. M., Hill, W. G., & Wray, N. R. (2008). Heritability in the genomics era-Concepts and misconceptions. Nature Reviews: Genetics,
9, 255-266.
Wehr, T. A., Sack, D., & Rosenthal, N. E. (1987). Sleep reduction as a final common pathway in the genesis of mania. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 144, 201-204.
Weissman, M. M. (1993). The epidemiology of personality disorders. In R. Michels (Ed.), Psychiatry (Volume 1, Section 15.2, pp. 1-11).
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott.
Weissman, M. M., Leaf, P. J., Tischler, G. L., & Blazer, D. G. (1988). Affective disorders in five United States communities. Psychological
Medicine, 18(1), 141-153.
Weissman, M., Markowitz, J., & Klerman, G. (2000). Comprehensive Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic
Guidelines. Geneva: Author.
Wright, K., & Lam, D. (2003). A cognitive theory for bipolar affective disorder. In M. Power (Ed.), Mood Disorders: A Handbook of Science
and Practice (pp. 235-246). Chichester: Wiley.
Zaretsky, A., Segal, Z. V., & Gener, M. (1999). Cognitive therapy for bipolar depression: A pilot study. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 44,
491-494.


Chapter 11 Suicide risk
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-11
Case example 1
Brian, aged 45, was brought by ambulance to the accident and emergency department of a major hospital following an overdose involving a
potentially lethal dose of tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), paracetamol and alcohol. Following emergency medical intervention, psychiatric
and psychological assessments were conducted to determine an appropriate short-term risk management plan and to lay the groundwork
for a longer-term treatment plan.
The incident
Brian had carefully planned the overdose. He had hoarded the TCAs and paracetamol and checked that the dose was lethal. He arranged his
financial affairs so that his wife would be supported adequately following his death and wrote a note explaining that he could no longer bear
the humiliation of redundancy or the torment of depression that he had suffered for 6 months. To take the overdose, he carefully selected the

Friday night of a weekend when his wife, Margaret, had arranged to visit her friend in another town. Indeed, the overdose would have been
fatal if Margaret had not unexpectedly returned after midnight on Friday and found Brian unconscious. Margaret's train had been repeatedly
delayed and finally cancelled, so she decided to return home and travel to her friend's house early on Saturday morning.
Presentation and recent history
In the assessment interview, it was clear that Brian had intended to end his life. He regretted that he had been unsuccessful. From his
perspective, his life had become unbearable. He had suffered from episodes of major depression since his mid-twenties. This had interfered
with his career in the IT industry and slowed his promotional progress. He had become embittered by his own sense of personal failure
and his distrust of his employers whom he saw as unfair and vindictive. He was made redundant 6 months before the overdose and this
precipitated an episode of severe depression. Brian was treated with TCAs by his GP. He let his GP know during a routine visit for medication
review that he wanted to end his life, but the GP did not judge him to be actively suicidal. Over the following weeks, Brian put his financial
affairs in order, and made careful arrangements for the potentially fatal overdose at a time when he assumed he would be alone for at least
72 hours.
Personal and family history
Brian came from a well-organised supportive family of origin. However, there was a history of mood disorders on both his mother's and
father's sides, and one of his uncles had committed suicide. Brian's development was broadly within normal limits until his first episode of
depression in his twenties. Fortunately he responded well to TCAs and between episodes he showed almost complete recovery.
Test results
On the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II), Hopelessness Scale, and Suicidal Ideation Questionnaire, all of Brian's scores were in the clinical

range. He was deeply depressed, profoundly hopeless and showed strong suicidal intent.
Formulation
It was concluded that Brian was a man in his mid-forties who had attempted suicide by taking a potentially lethal overdose under carefully
planned circumstances which precluded discovery and he clearly intended to end his life, a fact he had communicated to his GP some weeks
before the attempt. The suicide attempt occurred during an episode of major depression, which had been precipitated by redundancy 6
months previously. Brian was vulnerable to depression, having had a number of previous episodes and a family history of mood disorders.
Protective factors in this case included a good relationship with his wife Margaret, the fact that Brian had responded to treatment with TCAs
in the past, and the fact that he was a skilled IT professional with reasonable prospects of returning to work once his depression lifted.
Risk assessment
The immediate suicide risk in this case was judged to be high because of the high level of intent, the lethality of the method involved and the
severity of the predisposing mood disorder.
Management
A brief period of inpatient treatment on a psychiatric ward at the general hospital was arranged, during which Brian began a multimodal
programme of pharmacological and psychological therapy for his mood disorder and problem-solving therapy focusing on re-entering the
workforce. Once his BDI-II scores dropped into the moderate depression range he was discharged and continued treatment as an outpatient.
Case example 2
Sandra, aged 22, was brought by her boyfriend in a taxi to the accident and emergency department of a major city centre hospital following

an overdose involving a non-lethal dose of benzodiazepines and alcohol. She had also cut her arms with a carpet knife. These injuries were
not potentially fatal, as she had not cut her arteries. Following emergency medical intervention, psychiatric and psychological assessments
were conducted to determine an appropriate short-term risk management plan and to lay the groundwork for a longer-term treatment plan.
Presentation and recent history
In the assessment interview, it was clear that Sandra had been distressed when she cut her arms and took the overdose but had not intended
to end her life. She was relieved that she had been unsuccessful and that her boyfriend Bob had shown concern for her by bringing her to
the hospital. The couple had had a series of arguments over the preceding week, culminating in a major row that evening while both were
intoxicated. Sandra suspected that Bob was being unfaithful to her and no longer loved her. She wanted to punish him, so she locked herself
in the bathroom, swallowed whatever pills she could find and lay in a bath of warm water after cutting her arms. Sandra expected Bob to
break the lock on the door and to be distraught when he found her apparently bleeding to death in the bath. He was upset when he found her,
and she was relieved, because from her perspective this proved he still cared for her.
Personal and family history
Sandra came from a disorganised family of origin, characterised by physical child abuse, intimate partner violence, parental relationship
distress, and inconsistency in parenting style. Sandra ran away from home when she was aged 16 years. She led a bohemian lifestyle, never
holding a job for more than a couple of months, moving from one accommodation to another and from one stormy relationship to another.
She had only been with Bob about 4 months before her overdose. Sandra had a history of substance misuse and a number of previous minor
overdoses. After her last overdose, she was brought by a friend to the accident and emergency department of her local hospital. Details of
the overdose were taken, her stomach was pumped and she was sent home the following morning without being admitted or referred for

psychological assessment. Sandra recalled with great shame overhearing some staff talking about her as an 'attention-seeker' and 'time-
waster'. She had also been detoxified on one occasion after a period of heroin use.
Test results
On the BDI-II, Sandra's scores were in the moderate range. On the Beck Hopelessness Scale, her scores were not overly elevated. On the
Suicidal Ideation Questionnaire, there was evidence for suicidal ideation but not intent. A diagnostic interview confirmed that Sandra met
the criteria for borderline personality disorder.
Formulation
It was concluded that Sandra, in her early twenties, was a woman with borderline personality disorder who had engaged in acts of non-lethal
self-harm in an attempt to resolve an interpersonal conflict with her partner. The self-harm was impulsive and not carefully planned. Sandra
did not intend to end her own life. The self-harm represented a way for Sandra to prevent Bob from leaving her or to check if he really cared
about her. Sandra was vulnerable to using impulsive violent acts to solve interpersonal problems, as this was the norm in her disorganised
and violent family of origin. Protective factors in this case included the fact that Sandra did not report suicidal intent.
Risk assessment
The immediate suicide risk in this case was judged to be low because of the absence of intent and the low lethality of the method involved.
However, the risk of repeated self-harm was judged to be high because of the history of previous attempts, the high level of impulsivity,
the presence of borderline personality disorder and the demographic profile (young, single unemployed female from a violent disorganised
family background).


Management
Sandra was offered a programme of outpatient psychological therapy to help her manage her impulsivity and to develop skills for solving
interpersonal problems without recourse to self-harm.
Suicide and attempted suicide
These two cases occupy different positions on the self-harm continuum. Brian clearly was actively suicidal and fully intended to kill himself,
to escape from an intolerable situation. He had taken pains to avoid discovery and planned his suicide to the last detail. He was disappointed
when his plan failed. In contrast, Sandra feared that Bob would abandon her, and so used self-harm as a way of preventing this or checking
if it was true. She acted impulsively rather than in a planned way and she was not disappointed that her suicide attempt was unsuccessful.
This type of attempted suicide is referred to in the literature by a number of terms including non-suicidal self-injury, non-suicidal self-
harm, deliberate self-harm, self-injurious behaviour and parasuicide. It is distinguished from suicide in which strong intent was present,
illustrated by the case of Brian. Suicide and parasuicide are associated with different clusters of factors, but both also share features and
correlates in common (Hawton & van Heeringen, 2000; Kerkhof & Arensman, 2009; Lonnqvist, 2009a; Nock, 2014). In this chapter the
epidemiology of suicide and parasuicide will first be considered before addressing theoretical perspectives on suicide, risk factors associated
with self-harm and approaches to clinical management.
Epidemiology of suicide and parasuicide
International data on suicide and self-harm or attempted suicide from the World Health Organization (2014) show the following overall
trends. More people attempt suicide than die by suicide. The annual global age-standardised suicide rate is 11.4 per 100,000 population.


In contrast the estimated global annual prevalence of self-reported suicide attempts is approximately 4 per 1,000 adults. Suicide rates are
higher for males, whereas rates of attempted suicide are higher among females. Globally, suicide rates are 15 per 100,000 for men and 8 per
100,000 for women. In richer countries, three times as many men die of suicide than women do, but in low- and middle-income countries
the male-to-female ratio is much lower, at 1.5 men to each woman. Internationally, for both men and women suicide rates are highest in
adults over 70 years. There is a peak in suicide rates in young adults that subsides in middle age, and rates among young adult males in their
20s have increased in recent years. This is occurring in context where the global suicide rate has fallen 26% from 2000 to 2012. Suicide is
the second leading cause of death in young adults (15-29 years). The ingestion of pesticide, hanging and firearms are the most common
methods of suicide.
In the US lifetime prevalence rates for suicidal ideation are 15% and for having a suicide plan are 5% (Nock et al., 2014). More women
report suicidal ideation and more men report suicide plans. Males are more likely to make lethal suicide attempts due to selection of more
lethal methods (e.g. firearms), having psychological disorders associated with greater impulsivity and aggression than females, and being
less likely to engage in help-seeking behaviour.
About a third of those who seriously consider suicide make a suicide attempt, and the risk of this is greatest during the first year following
the onset of suicidal thinking (Nock et al., 2014). Between 30 and 60% of suicide attempters have made previous attempts, and 10-15% of
suicide attempters eventually die from suicide (Kerkhof, 2000). Between one-third and two-thirds of those who die by suicide have made
previous attempts (Sakinofsky, 2000). In a meta-analysis Walsh et al. (2015) found an extremely high rate of suicide rate (147 per 100,000
inpatient years) for psychiatric inpatients.

Theoretical perspectives
Within the broad field of suicidology there are multiple theoretical perspectives and research traditions (Hawton & van Heeringen, 2000;


Nock, 2014). Situational research has aimed to identify the behavioural correlates that distinguish suicidal intent from ideation, such as
taking precautions against discovery or method lethality (e.g. Beck & Steer, 1991). Situational research on the precipitants of suicide and self-
harm has aimed to identify and classify the life events or seasonal changes associated with suicide attempts (e.g. Chew & McLeary, 1995;
Paykel et al., 1975). Situational research on motives has attempted to classify the reasons for self-harm into a limited set of categories such
as escape or revenge (Bancroft et al., 1979). Sociological explanations for suicide have focused on the role of broad societal factors in the
economic, religious and familial domains in engendering a sense of alienation in certain demographically defined groups predisposed to
suicide (Sherman et al., 2014; Stack, 2000). Social and ecological models point to the role of peers, families and neighbourhoods in the
aetiology of suicide (Heilbron et al., 2014). Peer groups that victimise individuals, unsupportive or abusive families and disadvantaged
neighbourhoods characterised by social fragmentation all place individuals at risk of suicide. Psychological theories and related research
programmes have shown how certain personality traits, dispositions and cognitive factors may contribute to self-destructive behaviour.
These theories highlight the role of factors such as hopelessness, perfectionism, burdensomeness, low belongingness, unbearability,
autobiographical memory deficits, dichotomous thinking, impulsivity, rigidity and problem-solving skills deficits (McLeod, 2013; Weishaar,
2000; Wenzel & Spokas, 2014; Williams & Pollock, 2000). Psychiatric perspectives on suicide have attempted to establish coherent links
between specific syndromes such as depression, substance misuse, schizophrenia and personality disorders on the one hand and suicide on
the other (De Hert & Peuskens, 2000; Linehan et al., 2000; Lonnqvist, 2000b; Murphy, 2000). Biomedical explanations of suicide have
established the role of genetic factors in predisposing people to self-harm and pinpointed inefficiencies in specific neurotransmitter systems,
notably those involving serotonin and dopamine in cases of suicide (Crowell et al., 2014; Fiori et al., 2014). Probably integrative approaches
that draw together insights from these many traditions offer greatest promise for enhancing clinical practice (Selby et al., 2014; van
Heeringen et al., 2000).


An assessment and formulation framework for self-harm and suicide risk
Assessment of suicide risk and self-harm is necessary when individuals have recently self-harmed or attempted suicide, when they threaten
self-harm or suicide, or where they show signs of severe depression. Evaluating suicide risk and self-harm involves assessing the position of
the self-harming action on the suicidal ideation-intention continuum, the circumstances that led to the actual or threatened self-harming
action and the degree to which a range of risk and protective factors are present in a particular case. In light of information from this
assessment a formulation is constructed and a judgement made about the probability of a further suicide attempt or repeated non-suicidal
self-harming action. This is not an exact science. It involves careful interviewing and clinical judgement informed by what is known about
risk and protective factors for suicide and self-harm. A formulation framework to guide assessment is given in Figure 11.1. The factors listed
in this figure and discussed later are drawn from extensive literature reviews (Bongar & Sullivan, 2013; Hawton & van Heeringen, 2000;
Jacobs, 1999; Jobes, 2006; Lonnqvist, 2009a; McLeod, 2013; NICE, 2004, 2011; Nock, 2014; Nock et al., 2014; Rudd et al., 1999; Rudd & Joiner,
1998; Simon & Hales, 2012; WHO, 2014).
Within this formulation model a central distinction is made between suicidal ideation, where individuals think about their death, and
suicidal intention, where there is clear evidence of the individual's intention to end their own lives. These psychological states fall on a
continuum. They are also distinguished from states where repeated self-harm occurs without thoughts of death, to fulfil some function such
as relieving tension.


SUICIDE

More Lethal
Shooting
Hanging
Jumping

LETHALITY CONTINUUM

Less Lethal
Overdosing
Cutting
Burning

Suicidal Intention
Active suicidal attempts
Lethal method
Precautions against discovery
Lethal method
A final act

SUICIDAL INTENTION IDEATION CONTINUUM

Suicidal Ideation
Acceptance of no suicide
Acceptance of safe space
monitoring contract

NO INTENTION
TO DIE

PREDISPOSING RISK FACTORS
Biological
Genetic vulnerability
Dysregulation of serotonergic system
HPA axis overactivity (emotional reactivity)

Personality
High level of hopelessness
High level of impulsivity
High levels of hostility and aggression
High levels of obsessionality and low frustration tolerance
Poor emotional problem solving skills
Views self as a burden to others
Low levels of self esteem
Favourable attitude towards self injury as a way
of regulating emotions

Disorders
Depression
Alcohol and drug abuse
Borderline personality disorder
Antisocial personality disorder
Psychosis
Epilepsy
Chronic painful illness
Multiple comorbid chronic disorders

Personal History
Previous self harm and suicide attempts
Previous psychiatric treatment
Involvement in the juvenile justice system
Victim of bullying
Loss of a parent in early life
Physical and/or child abuse
Childhood adversity
Institutional upbringing

Family History
Family history of suicide attempts, depression, or
drug and alcohol abuse
Family history of assaultive behaviour
Family has high stress and crowding
Family has high stress and crowding
Family has low social support and is socially
isolated

Demographics
Low social class (risk of suicide)
Social isolation
Unwanted pregnancy
Asylum seeker
Male (risk of suicide)
Non heterosexual orientation
Early summer

Treatment System
Engagement problems

MOTIVATION
Resolve unbearable distress
Escape unbearable situation
Gain self relief for a feeling of good
Induce euphoria by releasing
endorphins
Experience emotional pain with
physical pain
Inflict self punishment
Gain revenge by inducing guilt
Gain care and attention

PRECIPITATING FACTORS
Stressful events
Victimisation
Death of a loved one
Humiliation or failure
Conflict with other
Involvement in judicial system
Severe physical illness or pain
Unwanted pregnancy
Intoxication
Media exposure to self harm
Anniversaries, spring & not office
hours

PROTECTIVE FACTORS
Coping skills
Good emotional problem solving skills
Good self regulation / distress tolerance skills
Flexible coping style
Capacity to solicit care from others
Supportive network
Capacity to resolve conflicts productively
Capacity to express anger assertively
Capacity to cope with family conflict
Capacity to distance self from deviant/suicidal peers

Personality
Low level of hopelessness
Low level of impulsivity
Low levels of hostility and aggression
Internal locus of control

Health
Absence of psychological disorders
Absence of physical disorders
Absence of multiple comorbid chronic disorders
Capacity to form attachment and engage in
treatment for psychological and physical disorders

Personal History
No previous suicide attempts
No previous self harm episodes
No involvement in the juvenile justice system
No bullying
Loss of a parent in early life
No physical or sexual child abuse
No childhood adversity

Family History
Supportive family
Family accept seriousness of suicide attempts
Family has low stress and adequate housing
Family has good social support network
Family is knowledgeable of suicide, depression or
drug and alcohol abuse
No family history of assaultive behaviour

Demographics and Peer Group
Moderate to good economic status
High social support
Strong religious commitment

Treatment System
Good therapeutic alliance
No harm and monitoring contracts


Figure 11.1 Formulation model for suicide risk and self-harm
A distinction is also made between extremely lethal and less lethal methods of self-harm, which represent two ends of a continuum. The
use of more lethal methods is associated with higher risk of suicide. Some less lethal methods, such as cutting, are associated with non-
suicidal repeated self-harm.
Circumstances that triggered or precipitated the self-harming action, and the way in which these circumstances motivated the individual
to self-harm, are specified within the formulation model. Finally, a distinction is made between a wide range of predisposing risk factors that
render individuals vulnerable to suicide or self-harm and protective factors associated with reduced risk.
Assessment of suicide risk and self-harm should cover the following domains with reference to the formulation model in Figure 11.1:
• Suicidal ideation and intention
• Method lethality
• Precipitating factors
• Motivation
• Personality-based factors and coping skills
• Disorder-related factors
• Personal history factors
• Family factors
• Demographic factors
• Treatment system factors.

Suicidal intention and ideation
Suicidal intention may be distinguished from suicidal ideation. Suicidal intention is characterised by
• Advanced planning
• Precautions against discovery
• Lethal method
• Absence of help-seeking
• A final act.
Thus, when self-harm is characterised by suicidal intention, there is evidence that individuals have engaged in advanced planning about
taking their own lives and have taken precautions against discovery. There is also evidence that they have used or intended to use a
potentially lethal method such as hanging, shooting themselves, or jumping from a very dangerous height and have not sought help or
intended to seek help after making the suicide attempt. Individuals with suicidal intentions typically also complete a final act such as
writing a suicide note. Where all of these features of suicidal intention are present, there is a high risk of suicide. Usually those with suicidal
intentions communicate this intent to the family doctor, a health care professional or significant other prior to acting. Where clients are
rescued from a suicidal situation, like Brian in the first case example that opened this chapter, they express a belief that the act was lethal and
irreversible, they regret having survived and have made no attempt to seek help after the attempt.
With suicidal ideation, in contrast, clients report thinking about self-harm and possibly engaging in impulsive non-lethal self-harm, like
Sandra in the second case example at the start of the chapter. This may involve superficial wrist cutting or a minor overdose. But these clients

have no definite clear-cut plans about killing themselves. Suicidal intention and ideation reflect two ends of a continuum, with states that
approximate suicidal intention reflecting a higher level of risk and those approximating suicidal ideation reflecting a lower level of risk.
The absence of suicidal intentions may be considered a protective factor. The acceptance by the individual of a verbal or written contract
during a suicide risk assessment, not to attempt suicide is a protective factor. The commitment on the part of the a significant person in
the service user's social network (e.g. a family member or close friend) to monitor the individual constantly until all suicidal intention and
ideation have abated is a further important protective factor to consider in this domain. This commitment may take the form of an oral or
written contract between the psychologist and the 'significant other'.
Method lethality
The lethality of the method used or threatened is an important factor to consider in assessing risk, with more lethal methods being
associated with greater risk in some instances. Using a firearm, hanging, jumping from a great height and self-poisoning with highly toxic
drugs are considered to be more lethal than cutting, burning oneself with cigarettes, or overdosing on non-prescription drugs. Within this
domain, the availability of a lethal method such as access to a firearm or highly toxic drugs constitutes an important risk factor for suicide.
Non-suicidal self-harm, particularly superficially cutting of the wrists and arms, should be distinguished from potentially lethal
incomplete suicide attempts. Non-lethal self-harm of this sort is sometimes associated with an attempt to relive tension or gain attention
following an interpersonal crisis. This type of self-harming is sometimes preceded by a sense of emptiness or depersonalisation (a sense of
not being oneself). Repeated non-suicidal self-harm of this type is common among clients with borderline personality disorder (discussed in
Chapter 27) and a history of child abuse or neglect, like Sandra in the second case example. These clients use repeated self-harm as a strategy
for coping with recurrent distressing psychological states or interpersonal crises, without ideas or intentions of ending their lives.

The unavailability of lethal methods, such as firearms and toxic drugs, is an important protective factor. This protective factor may be put
in place by inviting family members to remove guns, drugs and other lethal methods from the household or placing clients in a place where
they have no access to lethal methods.
The degree of suicidal intention cannot always be judged from the lethality of the method used. Where clients misunderstand the
degree of lethality associated with a particular method, apparently minor self-harming gestures, such as taking a small overdose of non-
prescription drugs, may be a significant risk factor for actual suicide.
Precipitating factors
Suicide attempts are commonly precipitated by major stressful life events, especially those involving loss experiences. The loss may be of a
highly valued person such as a partner, family member, or close friend. For people with chronic mental health problems, the loss may be of a
valued key worker with whom the client had regular supportive contact. Loss may occur through bereavement, severe physical illness, severe
psychological disorder, temporary or permanent separation, or in the case of marriage, through divorce. Loss of a job, money, prestige or
status may also precipitate suicide. Redundancy, which involves all of these, was the precipitating factor in the first case example at the start
of the chapter. Involvement in chronic gambling may also lead to some of these losses. Loss of esteem through victimisation or humiliation
may precipitate suicide.
Suicide may be precipitated by stresses such as severe personal illness or injury, the threat of prosecution, involvement in the judicial
system, imprisonment, conflict with partners or family members, unwanted pregnancy, or exam failure. Repeated attempted suicide
(as distinct from completed suicide) is associated with impulsive separation following romantic relationship difficulties or recent court
appearance associated with impulsive or aggressive antisocial behaviour. Sometimes apparently positive life events such as promotion or
increased responsibilities may precipitate suicide because they involve challenges that exceed clients' personal coping resources.

Suicide, arising from imitation of others, may be precipitated by suicides within the peer group or media coverage of suicides. Self-harm is more likely to occur where clients are intoxicated following alcohol or drug use. Intoxication increases impulsivity and impairs the capacity for flexible problem solving.

Certain times are associated with greater frequencies of suicide and so may be considered precipitating factors. Seasonal studies of suicide consistently show a peak for suicides in the spring, not the winter as one might expect. Suicides may be precipitated by anniversaries of loss experiences, such as a year following a bereavement. Suicides are more commonly committed during the evening or at weekends rather than during office hours.

Motivation
Individuals may be motivated to attempt suicide or self-harm for a wide variety of reasons. Suicide may be perceived as a way of escaping from an unbearable distress, for example distress associated with severe and chronic depression or physical pain. Suicide may also be seen as a way of escaping from an unbearable situation that has caused grief, shame or humiliation. From this perspective, death may be seen as a state that will bring relief from personal distress or situational stress. In rare circumstances clients may attempt suicide to sacrifice themselves for the greater good. Some individuals from disorganised conflictual families may view their self-harm as a necessary sacrifice that must be made to preserve the integrity of their family. That is, they may fantasise that their suicide will serve as a rallying point which will unite a fragmented family.

Repeated self-harm may be motivated by attempts to modify personal distress or interpersonal situations. With regard to personal distress, clients may engage in repeated self-harm such as cutting or burning themselves with cigarettes to punish themselves and so alleviate guilt for not living up to perfectionistic expectations. They may also engage in repeated self-harm to replace emotional pain with physical pain, or to induce euphoria by releasing endorphins. Some clients who repeatedly self-harm say that cutting or burning does not hurt them, but rather makes them feel good.

With regard to engaging in self-harm to modify relationships with family and friends, some clients may harm themselves to get care and
attention, or gain revenge by inducing guilt. For example an individual may take a non-lethal overdose to punish a romantic partner for
their hostility, or for leaving them through death, separation or illness. Here the sentiment is 'You have hurt me, but I will get my revenge by
hurting you through killing myself and causing you to feel guilt.'
Understanding the motives and functions that suicide attempts or repeated self-harm are intended to fulfil is important in treatment
planning. When the functions of an attempted suicide are understood, the treatment plan should help the client find other ways to fulfil
these functions. That is, treatment plans should help clients find less destructive ways for regulating distress; modifying painful situations;
managing perfectionistic expectations; expressing anger assertively; resolving conflicts productively; mourning losses; and soliciting social
support from family and friends.
Personality-based factors and coping skills
At a biological level, there is considerable evidence from twin and family studies that there is a genetic predisposition to suicidality. This
probably involves the serotonergic, and possibly the dopaminergic neurotransmission systems. These systems subserve the regulation of
depressive and aggressive affect, and impulsivity and are dysregulated in people who self-harm or attempt suicide. Suicidality is also
associated with HPA axis overactivity which subserves a high level of emotional reactivity. Dysregulation of the HPA axis may be caused by
genetic factors and early child maltreatment or trauma. These neurobiological factors probably contribute to the development of personality
traits which place adolescents at risk for suicide. These include hopelessness, perfectionism, impulsivity, hostility and aggression, an
inflexible coping style with poor distress tolerance, poor emotional problem-solving skills, viewing the self as burdensome to others,
viewing life as unbearable, and a favourable attitude towards using self-injury as a way of regulating emotions.
Individuals who attempt suicide are apt to view themselves as incapable of changing their situation, and so the future looks hopeless to
them. Perfectionism is a risk factor for suicide, probably because it leads to heightened self-expectations which may be difficult to achieve.

Suicidal individuals tend to be inflexible in their coping styles, are prone to black-and-white thinking, and have poor problem-solving skills.
They have difficulties drawing on memories of successfully solving social-emotional problems in the past and so have a limited repertoire
of coping strategies to draw upon when attempting to tolerate distress. Thus they resort to strategies which may be ineffective. Their
aggression and impulsivity may lead them to engage in self-directed aggression with little reflection on other possible alternatives for
solving their difficulties. Each time they use self-harm as a coping strategy, they may consolidate a favourable attitude towards self-injury
as a way of regulating emotions and coping with stress. Individuals who self-harm tend to view themselves as a burden on others and their
lives as unbearable.
Low levels of personality traits which place individuals at risk for suicide are protective factors in this domain, that is low levels
of hopelessness; perfectionism; impulsivity; hostility and aggression, and an internal locus of control. Good emotional problem solving,
self-regulation and distress tolerance skills, and a flexible coping style are particularly important protective factors. These skills permit
individuals to solicit social support from family and friends, mourn losses, resolve conflicts productively, express anger assertively, cope
with family disorganisation, and distance themselves from peers who may serve as deviant role models for self-harming or suicidal
behaviour. Treatment of self-harming clients focuses on helping them develop good emotional problem-solving, self-regulation and distress
tolerance skills.
Disorder-related factors
The presence of depression (discussed in Chapter 9) is the single strongest health-related risk factor for future suicide. Depression is strongly
associated with helplessness and hopelessness, both of which are associated with suicide. Major depression (a recurrent episodic mood
disorder) is strongly associated with completed suicide whereas dysthymia (a chronic milder non-episodic mood disorder) is associated
with repeated suicide attempts. Other disorders that are risk factors for suicide include alcohol and drug misuse (discussed in Chapter
24), antisocial or borderline personality disorders (discussed in Chapter 27) and psychosis (discussed in Chapter 25). All of these are more

common among impulsive individuals and impulsivity has already been mentioned as a personality-based risk factor for suicide. Epilepsy
and chronic painful illness are two medical conditions which place individuals at increased risk of suicide. Increased suicide risk is strongly
associated with multiple comorbid chronic psychological and physical disorders.
Good physical and mental health, and the absence of psychological or physical disorders are important protective factor in this domain. So
too is the capacity to form a good therapeutic alliance and engage in a contract for treatment of disorders including depression, alcohol and
drug misuse, antisocial or borderline personality disorders, psychosis, epilepsy and chronic painful illness.
Personal historical factors
Past self-harm is a risk factor for future self-harm. A history of previous non-suicidal self-harm or suicide attempts is the single strongest
historical risk factor for future suicide. Other historical risk factors include previous psychiatric treatment, a history of involvement in
the juvenile justice system, bullying, loss of a parent in early life, physical and sexual child abuse, childhood adversity and institutional
upbringing. The absence of these historical events is a protective factor as is a history of good premorbid adjustment.
Family factors
A family history of a range of problems, notably suicide attempts, depression, drug and alcohol misuse, and assaultive behaviour place
people at risk for suicide. In addition individuals are placed at increased risk of suicide if their family members are critical, unsupportive,
socially isolated, live in stressful overcrowded conditions, and if they deny the seriousness of the individual's suicidal intentions.
Protective family factors include a family history that does not entail suicide attempts, depression, drug and alcohol misuse, and
assaultive behaviour. The presence of a supportive family where there are low levels of stress and a high level of social support for the family
as a whole, and in which family members accept the seriousness of the person's self-harming actions, may also be considered protective

factors. Helping family members accept the seriousness of the individual’s self-harming actions and providing the client with ongoing support is a key element in the treatment of self-harm and suicide risk.

Demographic factors

Males are at greater risk for completed suicide while females are at greatest risk of repeated non-suicidal self-harm. Males tend to use more lethal methods (guns and hanging) whereas females use less lethal methods (cutting or self-poisoning). Non-heterosexual orientation, low socio-economic status, social isolation, and being an asylum seeker are risk factors for self-harm and suicide. There is a greater risk for suicide among individuals from communities with lower levels of religious practice. With respect to seasonality, completed suicide is most common in early summer.
Protective demographic factors include moderate socio-economic status, a high level of social support and membership of a culture with strong commitment to religious values and practices.

Treatment system factors

The way engagement occurs between clients and health professionals within the treatment system may place the client at increased risk of self-harm or suicide. Within this context, the treatment system includes current and past health professionals with whom clients have had prior contact including family doctors, other primary care workers and members of specialist multidisciplinary mental health teams. Increased suicide risk is associated with clients communicating their suicidal intentions to health care professionals. Clients who have a history of previous psychiatric treatment and those recently discharged from hospital are at increased risk also. The risk of suicide is increased in those circumstances where clients have developed a good relationship with a key worker who then becomes unavailable to the client, for example due to being on leave or changing jobs. Suicide risk increases also in situations where clients show symptomatic improvement in the face of unresolved problems. This may occur, for example, when depressed clients respond to antidepressant medication

by having increased energy, but have not had the opportunity in psychotherapy to explore ways of effectively resolving complex problems of
living or coping with challenging life stresses. Failure to form a good therapeutic alliance also places clients at increased risk of suicide since
it reduces support and problem-solving resources available to them.
On the positive side, forming a good therapeutic alliance and maintaining a stable therapeutic relationship with a designated key worker
are important protective factors within this domain. This creates the context within which clients may engage in a contract to address their
life difficulties and psychological disorders that have predisposed them to considering or attempting suicide. The acceptance of a verbal or
written contract not to commit suicide during a suicide risk assessment is also a protective factor. The commitment on the part of the client's
next of kin or family members to monitor the client constantly until all suicidal intention and ideation have abated is a further important
protective factor to consider in this domain. This commitment may take the form of an oral or written contract between the clinician and
next of kin.
Clinical management of suicide risk
The overriding objective of assessment and intervention where suicide has been threatened or attempted is to prevent harm, injury or death.
For clinical psychologists in training, it is usually appropriate for the assessment to be done by or with a clinical supervisor or another
senior experienced member of an adult mental health team to which the trainee psychologist is attached. However, for some psychologists
in training and many qualified psychologists, circumstances may dictate that they conduct initial suicide risk assessments alone. In such
circumstances, conduct the assessment, remain with the client, and as soon as it is practical to do so, contact the supervisor or a senior
clinician from your mental health team or agency. Certain broad principles for management, based on the literature and clinical experience,
may be followed (Bongar & Sullivan, 2013; Hawton & van Heeringen, 2000; Jacobs, 1999; Jobes, 2006; Lonnqvist, 2009a; McLeod, 2013;
NICE, 2004, 2011; Nock, 2014; Nock et al., 2014; Rudd et al., 1999; Rudd & Joiner, 1998; Simon & Hales, 2012; WHO, 2014).


Immediate comprehensive assessment
In cases where a recent suicide attempt has been made, use the interview schedule in Table 11.1 to assess risk. Obtain a detailed description
of the self-destructive behaviour that led to the referral and related suicidal or self-harming intentions. In cases where there has been no
recent episode of self-injury but where suicidal ideation is present, use the interview schedule in Table 11.2. Obtain a description of the
sequence of events that led up to the current suicidal ideation. In either circumstance, offer immediate consultation. Use the consultation
process to develop a comprehensive understanding of the situation surrounding the suicide threat or attempt. During the consultation
process, establish or deepen your working alliance with the client. Assess all of the risk and protective factors listed in Figure 11.1. Check if
the factors were present in the past, the extent to which they were present during the recent episode, and whether they are immediately
present. Build up a picture of the immediate circumstances surrounding the self-harming episode or suicidal ideation. Clarify if this is an
escalation of an entrenched pattern of interaction around previous suicidal ideas, intentions or acts of self-harm. In the recent episode and
previous episodes of suicidal ideation or self-harming behaviour, clarify the roles of significant family members, significant members of the
client's network and health professionals. The aim here is to obtain a coherent account of how the client came to view his or her life situation
as hopeless and selected self-harm as a solution to this experience of hopelessness. Take account of risk and protective factors, listed in
Figure 11.1, that may have contributed to the sequence of events that led to the client experiencing hopelessness and attempting or
considering suicide. Also cover relevant areas for a general intake assessment listed in Table 8.2 in Chapter 8; current and past substance
misuse; and diagnostic criteria for any major psychological disorders relevant to the case, particularly depression (Chapter 9), bipolar
disorder (Chapter 10), borderline personality disorder (Chapter 27) and schizophrenia (Chapter 25). At the conclusion of the interview,
integrate the client's story, check its accuracy and agree a plan with the client for discussing this account with the next of kin or significant
members of the client's network. Obtaining consent to discuss such confidential information with relatives is good ethical practice.


Table 11.1 Suicide risk assessment interview - recent episode version
Before you were referred here, what was going wrong in your life?
(probe precipitating life stresses, demographic profile, mental and physical health, significant members of family and social network,
involved health professionals, personality disorder)
What expectations did you have of yourself that you could not meet?
(probe perfectionism and high personal standards)
How much hope did you have that things could be better (on a scale of 1 to 10)?
(probe hopelessness)
How much did you believe you could make things in your life better (on a scale of 1 to 10)?
(probe helplessness)
What reasons did you have for living?
(probe reasons for living)
How did you reach the decision to harm yourself and what alternatives did you consider?
(probe problem solving, inflexibility, black-and-white thinking)
To what extent did you act on impulse, without thinking, when you harmed yourself?
(probe impulsivity, hostility, aggression)
How low was your mood on a scale of 1 to 10?
(probe history of depression)
Had you taken alcohol or something else to make things bearable?
(probe history of drug and alcohol use)

Which was stronger on a scale of 1 to 10, your will to live or your will to die?
(probe reasons for living)
Did you hear someone telling you that you should harm yourself?
(probe auditory hallucinations associated with schizophrenia or psychotic depression, psychiatric history and treatment compliance)
Had you a plan to harm yourself and what preparations had you made?
(assess impulsive self-harm versus planned self-harm)
How exactly did you harm yourself?
(probe lethality)
When did this happen?
(probe season, day of week, time of day, anniversary reaction)
Did your believe the method of self-harm was lethal and that nothing could be done to save you if you were discovered?
(probe lethality and irreversibility)
Did you let others know about your plan to harm yourself or were you secretive?
(probe precautions against discovery)
Did you write a letter to anyone explaining why you are harming yourself?
(probe details of final acts)
Did you take steps to make a will or put your affairs in order before you harmed yourself?
(probe final act)
What did you hope your family, friends and significant people in your life would think, do and feel when they found you?
(probe motivations for suicide)
What happened afterwards and how did you survive?

(probe precautions against discovery, help-seeking, involvement of other health professionals)
Do you regret having survived?
(probe regret)
In what way did you believe that self-harm would solve the difficulties you faced?
(probe problem solving)
When you look back on that episode, do you think now that there were other things you could have done, besides harming yourself, to
deal with the difficulties you faced?
(probe problem solving)
When you look into the future now, are you hopeful about changing your situation so that it will become more bearable?
(probe hopefulness and optimism)
Are there family members, friends or health professionals that you believe are able and willing to help you solve your current problems?
(probe family, social network, professional network)
Are you willing to promise not to harm yourself between now and the next time we meet and to sign a contract stating this?
Are you willing for your next of kin or significant other to witness you signing a contract?
Table 11.2 Suicide risk assessment interview - current state version
What is going wrong in your life right now?
(probe precipitating life stresses, demographic profile, mental and physical health, significant members of family and social network,
involved health professionals, personality disorder)
What expectations do you have of yourself that you think you cannot meet?
(probe perfectionism and high personal standards)

How hopeful are you that things will get better (on a scale of 1 to 10)?
(probe hopelessness)
How much do you believe that you can make things in your life better (on a scale of 1 to 10)?
(probe helplessness)
What reasons have you for living?
(probe reasons for living)
How would harming yourself solve the problems you now face and can you see any alternatives right now?
(probe problem solving, inflexibility, black-and-white thinking)
If you harm yourself in future are you likely to do this impulsively without thinking?
(probe impulsivity, hostility, aggression)
How low is your mood now (on a scale of 1 to 10)?
(probe history of depression)
If you harm yourself, do you expect you may take alcohol or something else to make things bearable?
(probe history and future possibility of drug and alcohol use)
Which is stronger right now on a scale of 1 to 10, your will to live or your will to die?
(probe reasons for living)
Do you sometimes hear someone telling you should harm yourself?
(probe auditory hallucinations associated with schizophrenia or psychotic depression, psychiatric history and treatment compliance)
Have you a plan to harm yourself?
(assess impulsive self-harm versus planned self-harm)
What preparations have you made to harm yourself?

How exactly will you harm yourself?
(probe lethality)
When do you think this will happen?
(probe season, day of week, time of day, anniversary reaction)
Do you believe the method of self-harm is lethal and that there will be nothing anyone can do to save you if you are discovered?
(probe lethality and irreversibility)
Will you let others know about your plan to harm yourself or will you keep it a secret?
(probe precautions against discovery)
Will you write a letter to anyone explaining why you are harming yourself?
(probe details of final acts)
Will you take steps to make a will or put your affairs in order before you harm yourself?
(probe final act)
What do you hope your family, friends and significant people in your life will think, do and feel when they discover you?
(probe motivations for suicide)
If you survive will you regret this?
(probe regret)
Are there family members, friends or health professionals that you believe are able and willing to help you solve your current problems?
(probe family, social network, professional network)
Are you willing to promise not to harm yourself between now and the next time we meet and to sign a contract stating this?
Are you willing for your next of kin or significant other to witness you signing this contract?

Standardised tests and questionnaires
A number of psychological tests and questionnaires may be helpful in conducting a suicide risk assessment. For assessing suicide intent
and ideation, the Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation (Beck & Steer, 1991) and the Adult Suicidal Ideation Questionnaire (Reynolds, 1991) are
useful adjuncts to a clinical interview, especially where people are reluctant to talk. The Suicidal Behaviour History Form (Reynolds &
Mazza, 1992) offers a systematic way of obtaining a self-harm history. Other useful standardised assessment instruments for assessing
constructs relevant to suicide risk include the Beck Depression Inventory-II (Beck et al., 1996), the Beck Hopelessness Scale (Beck & Steer,
1988), the Reasons for Living Inventory (Linehan et al., 1983) and the Revised Social Problem Solving Inventory (D'Zurilla et al., 2001). The
hopelessness and depression scales measure two key risk factors, whereas scales for evaluating reasons for living and problem-solving skills
throw light on important protective factors.
The Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviours Interview (Nock et al., 2007) and the Suicide Attempt Self-Injury Interview (Linehan et al.,
2006) are structured interviews with good psychometric properties that are useful for assessing past episodes of non-suicidal self-harm. The
Inventory of Statements About Self-Injury (Glenn & Klonsky, 2011) may be used to assess motives for non-suicidal self-injury.
Collateral interviews
It is useful to conduct at least three different interviews: one with the client, one collateral interview with the next of kin or a significant
member of the client's family or social network, and a conjoint interview. Clients must give consent for their next of kin or significant
members of their families or social networks to be involved in the assessment process, except in cases where involuntary detention is
being arranged or cases where there is evidence of diminished capacity for rational decision making (discussed later). In the collateral
interview, follow a similar line of questioning to that outlined in Tables 11.1 and 11.2. The separate client and collateral interviews provide


opportunities to obtain different perspectives on the presence or absence of risk and protective factors. Clients and members of their families
or social networks may feel freer to give their frank opinions and views in separate interviews than in conjoint interviews. However, it is
important also to conduct a conjoint interview to explore and clarify differences between the client's views and those of their significant
others. A clinician who will go on to work individually with the client will likely find it easier to build a therapeutic alliance with the client
if from the outset all conversations with family members are held in the presence of the client. In such situations, it may be preferable if
another team member is involved in any meetings with the family from which the client is excluded. Also, it is useful to offer the formulation
and management plan within the context of a conjoint interview, since the management plan will often involve key responsibilities for the
client's significant other.
Contact with other health professionals
Where possible, obtain information relating to risk and protective factors from health professionals who have had previous involvement
with the case. Such professionals may include the GP or family doctor, and the psychiatrist or key worker if the client is receiving regular
care from a mental health service. Identify people within the client's professional network, family and social network who may be available
to help implement a short-term management plan and possibly contribute to a longer-term treatment plan.
Formulation
Draw the information you obtain from the client, the collateral interview and other professionals into a clear formulation on which a short-
term management plan may be based. The formulation must logically link together the risk factors identified in the case to explain the
occurrence of the episode of self-harming behaviour or suicidal ideation and the current level of risk. It is important to specify predisposing
factors and triggering factors that led to an escalation from suicidal ideation to intention or from suicidal intention to self-injury. The

formulation should be specific, and pinpoint how specific life circumstances precipitated the specific act of self-harm or suicidal ideation
and how a constellation of predisposing risk factors rendered the client vulnerable to the present episode. Examples of formulations are
given in each of the cases which opened this chapter.
Judging risk
Clients may be considered a serious immediate suicide risk if they (1) show suicidal intent as indicated by the presence of most of the factors
listed in the first domain of Figure 11.1 and (2) plan to use a high lethality method. The greater the number of other risk factors that are
present, the greater the risk of immediate suicide. If there is no evidence of suicidal intent and few other risk factors are pinpointed in the
assessment, then the risk of immediate suicide is probably low.
Specific predisposing risk factors for suicide risk after attempted suicide
Specific predisposing risk factors for completed suicide following self-harm deserving special weighting are previous suicide attempts,
major mental and physical health problems, and being a non-working, single male over 60 who lives alone (Hawton, 2000).
Specific predisposing risk factors for repeated non-fatal self-harm
Another issue requiring assessment is judging the risk of further non-lethal self-harm. Specific predisposing risk factors for this deserving
special weighting are previous episodes of self-harm; recent court appearance associated with impulsive or aggressive personality disorder;
major mental health problems; and being a young, lower-class, unemployed female from an abusive, disorganised family background
(Hawton, 2000; Kerkhof & Arensman, 2009; Sakinofsky, 2000). Many of these factors were present in the second case example presented at
the beginning of this chapter.


Short-term management plan
Develop a management plan which specifies the short-term action to be taken in light of the formulation and level of risk. The short-term
plan must logically indicate that the changes it involves will probably lower the risk of self-harm. The short-term plan may involve either
brief hospitalisation or an outpatient care programme. If a short-term outpatient management plan is offered, clients and their next of
kin or significant members of their families or social networks must sign no-harm and monitoring contracts, like those in Box 11.1, at the
conclusion of the initial assessment session and each subsequent session, and give commitments to attend scheduled appointments.
Box 11.1 No-harm and monitoring contracts
No-Harm Contract
I promise that I will not harm myself between now and the next time we meet.
I promise that if I feel an urge to harm myself I will let my next of kin or significant other know immediately and will contact the
clinic immediately at this number:
Signed _______________(Client)
Witnessed _______________(Psychologist)
Witnessed _______________(Next of kin or significant other)
Date _______________
Monitoring Contract
I promise that I will arrange for _______________ to be under 24-hour observation at my home on the following
dates: _______________

I promise that if there is any sign that he or she has an urge to harm himself or herself I will contact the clinic immediately at this
number:
Signed (Next of kin or significant other)
Witnessed (Client)
Witnessed (Psychologist)
Date

No-harm contracts, monitoring contracts, and on-call commitments
For clients, no-harm contracts involve making a commitment not to make further suicide attempts while engaged in treatment. For
significant members of the family and social network the contract involves making a commitment to monitor the client to prevent
further self-harm. For clients who have strong suicidal intent, this involves developing a family rota for keeping the client under 24-hour
supervision to prevent repeated suicide attempts; agreeing that the person on the rota will only engage in supportive and non-conflictual
conversation with the client; and phoning the clinic's 24-hour on-call service as a last resort if strong suicidal ideation and intentions persist.
Ideally the no-harm and monitoring contracts are offered as part of therapeutic plan in which the client and significant others are given a 24-
hour on-call phone number that they may call to contact a member of the treatment team if strong suicidal ideation and intentions persist.
If, due to unforeseen circumstances or ill health, you are unable to attend any follow-up appointments with clients at risk of suicide, it is
vital to make arrangements for the client to be met by another member of the mental health team or for the appointment to be rescheduled
as soon as possible.

Voluntary hospital-based care
If hospitalisation is necessary, contact the appropriate psychiatrist or mental health professional. To assist them in conducting a preadmission assessment, brief them on the reasons why you think hospitalisation may be necessary. If you are involved in case management following hospitalisation, the following points should be borne in mind. The chief concern for hospitalised suicidal clients is to ensure their safety. This may involve 24-hour constant observation and restricting access to objects (knives, electricity sockets, belts, electric flexes, etc.) and situations (e.g. upper storey open or breakable windows) that may create opportunities for suicide. Making such arrangements typically involves following local procedural guidelines and careful negotiation with nursing staff. Along with ensuring the client's safety, hospitalisation should also create a context for developing a plan for solving significant problems associated with suicide risk and treating mental health difficulties. As part of the admission contract, the client, next of kin, significant family members or members of the client's social network should be invited to attend a series of sessions aimed at planning ways to modify risk or triggering factors that contributed to the crisis and that when modified would create a safe context for discharge from hospital. Thereafter, the protocol outlined earlier for home-based care should be followed. There is good evidence from a randomised controlled trial that partial hospitalisation offered as part of a psychoanalytically oriented treatment programme may effectively reduce suicide attempts for clients with borderline personality disorder (Bateman & Fonagy, 1999, 2001). In those rare instances where such specialist resources are available and hospitalisation is required, this is the preferred evidence-based approach.
Involuntary detention
If clients will not accept brief voluntary hospitalisation or outpatient care with no-harm and monitoring contracts and you judge them to be a danger to themselves or others, then follow local procedures to request a statutory assessment for involuntary detention or committal under mental health legislation. Clinical psychologists in training should consult their clinical supervisors about local procedures, as these

vary from one jurisdiction to another. Often experienced clinicians may help clients accept a voluntary admission as the best course of
action and so avoid the necessity of involuntary detention.
Competence and involuntary treatment
When treatment refusal occurs with involuntarily detained clients, the client's competence to accept or refuse treatment will require
statutory assessment. Such assessments are conducted under mental health legislation, which varies from one jurisdiction to another. To
be competent to accept or refuse treatment, clients must be able to (1) understand relevant information, (2) believe this information to be
true and (3) weigh up the pros and cons in a balanced way for accepting or rejecting treatment. Severe depression, delusions, hallucinations,
delirium and intellectual disability are examples of psychological factors that may impair a client's competence to make decisions about
their need for treatment. Psychologists in training should ask their clinical supervisors how to follow local guidelines for referring cases for
statutory assessment of competence. To safeguard against unnecessary involuntary detention and treatment, in most jurisdictions mental
health legislation includes appeal procedures, which once again are usually implemented following local guidelines.
Discharge planning
Following either voluntary or involuntary hospitalisation, careful discharge planning is essential, and such plans should involve no-harm
contracts with clients, and monitoring contracts with relatives or next of kin, as described earlier. Clients are at particular risk of suicide just
prior to and following discharge. This is particularly the case with depressed clients who have regained their energy as a result of treatment
but still have many unresolved problems.
Long-term planning
Once short-term safety plans have been put in place, develop longer-term plans to treat mental health difficulties and resolve significant

problems associated with suicide risk.
Longer-term planning should address client's needs as identified in the assessment and formulation and should take account of available
evidence-based methods for reducing suicide risk. It is useful to routinely include no-harm contracts in longer-term outpatient treatment
programmes.
Psychotherapy
Intensive dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT), brief problem-solving therapy, and outreach therapy are the only three outpatient
psychological therapy approaches that have been shown to reduce the rate of repeated suicide attempts in controlled trials (Hawton et
al., 1998; Heard, 2000; Linehan, 2000; Ward-Ciesielski & Linehan, 2014). DBT, described in Chapter 27, involves comprehensive overall
case management, intensive individual psychotherapy, group-based behavioural problem-solving skills training, mindfulness meditation
training, and systemic intervention as appropriate in the family, social network, health services, social services and judicial system. It is
probably appropriate where the specialist resources for DBT are unavailable to routinely offer problem-solving therapy (described shortly)
coupled with other interventions appropriate for treatment of psychological disorders identified during the risk assessment. Where clients
continue to be at reasonably high risk of suicide or fail to attend outpatient appointments, this type of treatment may be offered within the
context of an outreach approach. The principles of outreach therapy are to provide ongoing weekly home visits with individual and family-
based support, and crisis intervention as required until the risk of suicide reduces.
Problem-solving therapy
With problem-solving therapy (Nezu et al., 2013) work collaboratively with the client and if appropriate, the next of kin and significant
family members or members of the client's social network. In light of the formulation, identify key problems that, if solved, would reduce
suicide risk. Prioritise these and agree a contract with the client and significant others to work through them in a systematic fashion, one at

a time over a planned number of sessions. For each problem, work to define it in solvable terms. 'Sorting my life out' is a vague problem
definition which might be redefined as 'Organising affordable accommodation and starting to look for a job'. Break big problems into a
number of smaller ones, with clearly defined, moderately challenging goals. For each of these, with the client and significant other,
brainstorm multiple possible solutions. Examine the pros and cons of each before settling on a preferred solution that is within the client's
competence. Then help the client and significant other to write out a step-by-step plan to implement all or part of the preferred solution
between one session and the next. If appropriate, role-play and rehearse the plan. Rehearsal may throw light on beliefs and assumptions that
may prevent clients from following through on plans. The validity of these problematic beliefs and assumptions may be addressed using
cognitive behavioural methods described in Chapter 3. When clients agree to follow through on a plan between one session and the next,
always review progress at the next session. If no progress has been made, examine the reasons for this in a non-critical way. Brainstorm ways
to overcome obstacles that blocked the implementation of plans between sessions. If appropriate, arrange to phone the client and significant
other between sessions to remind them to work on implementing the plan. When each plan is implemented, review how successful it was.
If it was successful, help the client and significant other find ways to celebrate success. If it was not successful, modify the plan to increase
the chances of success and help the client and significant other list the steps necessary to implement the modified plan with a view to
reviewing its impact when implemented. Continue with this systematic problem-solving approach until the problems on the agreed
problem list have been addressed. Throughout the process routinely monitor suicide risk at each session, and help the client make links
between reductions in levels of suicidal ideation or intent and success with solving problems on the problem list.
Pharmacotherapy
Few controlled trials with adequate sample sizes of the effects of pharmacological therapies on repeated suicide have been conducted, and
much of what we know is based on epidemiological studies of survival rates (Fawcett & Busch, 2014; Hawton et al., 1998; Saunders &
Hawton, 2009; Verkes & Cowen, 2000). The main findings from these studies are consistent with the view that appropriate pharmacological


treatment of a client's psychological disorder may also reduce the risk of repeated suicide attempts in clients with such disorders. For
clients with bipolar disorder, treatment with lithium carbonate reduces the risk of repeated suicide attempts. Clozapine decreases the risk
of repeated suicide attempts in clients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. For clients with major depression, TCAs and selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may help decrease the probability of multiple suicide attempts, although there is the risk in young adults that
antidepressants may increase the risk of suicide by increasing energy levels without concurrently decreasing pessimistic thinking. Also,
since it is easier to overdose on TCAs because of their greater toxicity, SSRIs are the preferred antidepressant for potentially suicidal clients
with a diagnosis of major depression. For clients with personality disorders who have low mood and who have made repeated suicide
attempts, SSRIs may help decrease the probability of further self-harm, whereas benzodiazepines may increase the risk of multiple suicide
attempts. It is currently best practice to use combined psychological and pharmacological treatment programmes for many psychological
problems. Such multimodal treatment programmes for depression, bipolar disorders, schizophrenia and personality disorders are described
in detail in Chapters 9, 10, 25 and 27, respectively. When clients at risk of suicide are prescribed medication, the least toxic option should
be chosen, and where possible, responsibility for the storage of quantities of medication should be given to family members or significant
others, to reduce the opportunities for overdosing. If this is not possible, only small quantities should be prescribed at any one time.
Active follow-up
Clients who attempt or threaten suicide are at risk for not attending follow-up appointments, and so an active approach to follow-up is
vital (Hawton et al., 1998; Heard, 2000; Ward-Ciesielski & Linehan, 2014). The client and significant others should be given a definite
appointment after the initial consultation and this should be within a couple of days of the first meeting. They should be contacted by
phone to remind them about the appointment and to enquire about non-attendance if this occurs. The number, duration and agenda
for therapeutic sessions should be made clear to both from the outset and the importance of follow-up for preventing further suicide
threats and attempts should be highlighted. Clients at greater risk should be given more frequent appointments. Those that do not attend

appointments should be followed up with letters, phone calls or home visits. Document session-to-session changes in suicide risk status by
noting the level of intent or ideation.
Effects of working with suicide and the importance of supervision
Working with suicidal clients is very demanding. They make slow progress and elicit strong countertransference reactions in most
clinicians. These reactions typically involve urges to rescue and protect them from the multiple life stresses with which they are having
difficulty coping; or urges to abandon or persecute them for failing to make therapeutic progress or for repeated suicide attempts despite
the clinician's best efforts. In the long term, working with a caseload that includes a number of clients who repeatedly self-harm may
make clinicians doubt their own clinical competence and make them question the value of their work. When clinicians ruminate about
countertransference reactions and doubts about competence, they have difficulties concentrating on their work and tend to make more
mistakes, which in turn confirms their doubts about their competence. All of these intense reactions may 'spill over' into the clinicians'
non-professional lives having a negative impact on relationships with family and friends; on the efficiency with which the immune system
functions; and on the degree of alcohol and drug use. Because of the potential negative effects of working with suicidal clients, it is essential
to have regular supervision (Fleming & Steen, 2004; Hawkins & Shohet, 2012). Within the supervisory relationship, the clinician has an
opportunity to express and explore their countertransference reactions and doubts on the one hand and check out the validity of their
assessments and interventions on the other. The supervisor (or peer supervision group) should offer a safe and supportive context in which
this may occur. The supervisory relationship also offers a context within which clinicians may explore ways of balancing their caseloads so
that they do not have more self-harming clients than they may adequately cope with. Finally, the supervisory relationship offers a forum
for initially addressing immediate reactions to completed suicides. However, for most psychologists in training and qualified psychologists,
recovery from a client dying by suicide may best be facilitated through personal grief counselling or psychotherapy.

Family support following suicide
Where clients commit suicide it may be appropriate in certain circumstances to offer consultation to significant members of their families
and social networks (Clark & Goldney, 2000; Parker, 2014). This may be especially appropriate where you have worked with the client and
offer the family and friends of the deceased a clearly formulated explanation of the multiple risk factors present before the suicide. This
type of consultation may be helpful in preventing family and friends from holding themselves fully responsible for not preventing the
suicide and in facilitating the grief process. It was noted in Chapter 1 that following bereavement, most people experience some or all of the
following grief processes: shock, denial or disbelief, yearning and searching, sadness, anger, anxiety, guilt and bargaining, and acceptance.
There is not a clear-cut progression through these processes. Rather, at different points in time, one or other process predominates.
Consulting to families bereaved by suicide is very demanding clinical work and should be undertaken conjointly with a trusted colleague or
in such a way that there are opportunities to prepare and debrief with a supervisor or trusted colleague following such session. Following
such consultations it may be appropriate in some instances to refer bereaved families and friends for grief counselling, since there is some
evidence that this may reduce the negative impact of bereavement (Clark & Goldney, 2000; Parker, 2014).
Legal issues and the importance of documentation
In cases of suicide or repeated self-harm, clients' families may take legal action against clinicians or health care institutions for malpractice
(Bongar & Sullivan, 2013). This may cover charges such as failure to properly assess and diagnose a psychological disorder, failure to take
adequate precautions against suicide, inappropriate early release or discharge of the client, failure to involuntarily detain the client under
mental health legislation, and failure to offer adequate ongoing treatment and risk management following initial assessment. In the event
of legal action, contemporaneous notes are central to the defence of the clinician or institution. For this reason it is particularly important


to keep clinical notes and write up a comprehensive assessment report to carefully document the assessment process, the formulation, the
initial risk assessment, the short- and long-term management plans, and the ongoing assessment of risk and changes in the client's suicidal
risk status from one session to the next. The guidelines in Chapter 8 on report writing and keeping progress notes may be followed for this
purpose.
Summary
The annual global age-standardised suicide rate is 11.4 per 100,000 population. A distinction is made between suicide motivated by a wish
to die and self-harm which may be carried out to achieve other goals. The risk of suicide and repeated self-harm is determined by multiple
factors. Chief among these are the degree of suicidal intention and the lethality of the method chosen. Other predisposing risk factors
have been identified in the following domains: biological factors, personality, psychological disorders, personal history, family history,
demographic factors and treatment system factors. Suicide attempts and acts of self-harm are usually precipitated by stressful life events
and challenges that exceed available coping resources at times when clients are particularly vulnerable to suicide. Suicide risk assessments
should cover these risk factors and involve interviews with the client, collateral interviews with significant others and conjoint interviews.
Involved health professionals should also be contacted. The assessment should lead to a formulation that shows how risk factors explain the
occurrence of the episode of self-harming behaviour or suicidal ideation. High suicidal intent and extreme method lethality are indicative
of serious immediate suicide risk. Short-term management plans that prevent immediate danger, and longer-term treatment plans that
address mental health difficulties and life problems that predisposed the client to suicide, should be drawn up in light of the formulation.
Short-term plans may include brief hospital-based care or community-based care. Where people at high risk of suicide refuse hospital
admission and treatment, involuntary committal and treatment following statutory assessment under mental health legislation may
be appropriate. Evidence-based long-term plans may include combined psychological and pharmacological treatment programmes that


include dialectical behaviour therapy (for frequent attempters) or problem-solving therapy offered within the context of an outreach active
follow-up model of care. Because of the potential negative effects of working with suicidal clients, it is essential to have regular supervision.
Where clients commit suicide, it may be appropriate in certain circumstances to offer consultation to significant members of their families
and social networks and to refer for grief counselling. Always carefully document work with clients at risk of suicide because of the risk of
litigation.
Exercise
Working in groups of three, assign the roles of client, clinical psychologist and observer. Role-play assessment interviews with Sandra and
Brian, the clients introduced at the start of this chapter, changing roles after each interview.
Assume you are meeting Brian as an inpatient. Assess his level of risk using Table 11.2 and prepare a summary for your supervisor and
team. If information from other sources would be helpful, negotiate his permission to contact or meet them.
Assume you are meeting Sandra at an outpatient appointment 2 weeks after her visit to the accident and emergency department. She
reports that everything is fine again, denies the seriousness of the incident and says she and her boyfriend are planning a week's holiday in a
month's time. Assess her current level of risk and her motivation for psychological treatment.
After each role-play, the observer, 'clinical psychologist' and 'client' give comments on the interview in turn, including at least three
positive aspects of the interview they noticed, as well as a maximum of three constructive suggestions for improving the interview.
Discuss the legal and ethical issues raised by the role-plays with Brian and Sandra.


Further reading for practitioners
Bongar, B., & Sullivan, G. (2013). The Suicidal Patient. Clinical and Legal Standards of Care (Third Edition). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Hawton, K., & Catalan, J. (1987). Attempted Suicide: A Practical Guide to its Nature and Management (Second Edition). Oxford: Oxford
Medical Publications.
Jacobs, D. (1999). (Ed). The Harvard Medical School Guide to Suicide Assessment and Intervention. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Jobes, D. A. (2006). Managing Suicide Risk: A Collaborative Approach. New York: Guilford.
Nezu, A., Nezu, C., & D’Zurilla, T. (2013). Problem Solving Therapy. A Treatment Manual. New York: Springer.
Nock, M. (2014). Oxford handbook of suicide and self-injury. Oxford; Oxford University Press.
Assessment instruments
Beck, A., & Steer, R. (1988). Beck Hopelessness Scale. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Brace.
Beck, A., & Steer, R. (1991). Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Brace. www.psycorp.com
Beck, A., Steer, R., & Brown, G. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory-Second Edition (BDI-II). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
D'Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. M., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2001). Manual for the Social Problem Solving Inventory-Revised. North Tonawanda, NY:
Multi-Health Systems.
Glenn, C. R., & Klonsky, E. D. (2011). One-year test-retest reliability of the inventory of statements about self-injury (ISAS). Assessment,
18(3), 375-378.


Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., Brown, M. Z., Heard, H. L., & Wagner, A. (2006). Suicide attempt self-injury interview (SASII):
Development, reliability, and validity of a scale to assess suicide attempts and intentional self-injury. Psychological Assessment, 18(3),
303-312.
Linehan, M., Goodstein, J., Nielson, S., & Chiles, J. (1983). Reasons for staying alive when you are thinking of killing yourself. The Reasons
for Living Inventory. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 880-881.
Nock, M., Holmberg, B., Photos, V., & Michel, B. (2007). Self-injurious thoughts and behaviours interview: Development, reliability, and
validity in an adolescent sample. Psychological Assessment, 19, 309-317.
Reynolds, W. (1991). Adult Suicidal Ideation Questionnaire. Professional Manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Reynolds, W., & Mazza, J. (1992). Suicidal Behaviour History Form: Clinician's Guide. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Further reading for clients
Ellis, T., & Newman, C. (1996). Choosing to Live: How to Defeat Suicide Through Cognitive Therapy. New York: New Harbinger Publications.
References
Bancroft, J., Hawton, K., Simkin, S., Kingston, B,, Cumming, C., & Whitwell, D. (1979). The reasons people give for taking overdoses. A
further inquiry. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 52, 353-365.
Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (1999). Effectiveness of partial hospitalization in the treatment of borderline personality disorder. A
randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1563-1569.


Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2001). Treatment of borderline personality disorder with psychoanalytically oriented partial hospitalization.
AN 18-month follow-up. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 36-42.
Beck, A., & Steer, R. (1988). Beck Hopelessness Scale. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Brace.
Beck, A., & Steer, R. (1991). Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Brace.
Beck, A., Steer, R., & Brown, G. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory (Second Edition) (BDI-II). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Bongar, B., & Sullivan, G. (2013). The Suicidal Patient. Clinical and Legal Standards of Care (Third Edition). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Chew, K., & McLeary, R. (1995). The spring peak in suicides: A cross-national analysis. Social Science and Medicine, 40, 223-230.
Clark, S., & Goldney, R. (2000). The impact of suicide on relatives and friends. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The International
Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 467-484). Chichester: Wiley.
Crowell, S., Derbidge, C., & Beauchaine, T. (2014). Developmental approaches to understanding suicidal and self-injurious behaviours. In
M. Nock (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Suicide and Self-Injury (pp. 183-205). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Hert, M., & Peuskens, J. (2000). Psychiatric aspects of suicidal behaviour: Schizophrenia. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The
International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 121-134). Chichester: Wiley.
D'Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. M., & Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2001). Manual for the Social Problem Solving Inventory-Revised. North Tonawanda, NY:
Multi-Health Systems.
Fawcett, J., & Busch, K. (2014). The pharmacologic treatment of suicidal patients. In M. Nock (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Suicide and
Self-Injury (pp. 385-396). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fiori, L., Ernst, C., & Turecki, G. (2014). Genetic and neurobiological approaches to understanding suicidal behaviours. In M. Nock (Ed.),
The Oxford Handbook of Suicide and Self-Injury (pp. 155-182). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fleming, I., & Steen, L. (2004). Supervision and Clinical Psychology. London: Brunner Routledge.


Glenn, C. R., & Klonsky, E. D. (2011). One-year test-retest reliability of the inventory of statements about self-injury (ISAS). Assessment,
18, 375–378.
Hawkins, P., & Shohet, R. (2012). Supervision in the Helping Professions (Fourth Edition). Buckingham: Open University Press.
Hawton, K. (2000). General hospital management of suicide attempters. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The International
Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 519–537). Chichester: Wiley.
Hawton, K., Arensman, E., Townsend, E., Bremmer, S., Feldman, E., Goldney, R., ... Traskman-Bendz, L. (1998). Deliberate self-harm:
Systematic review of efficacy of psychosocial and pharmacological treatments in preventing suicide repetition. British Medical Journal,
317, 441–447.
Hawton, K., & van Heeringen, K. (2000). The International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide. Chichester: Wiley.
Heard, H. (2000). Psychotherapeutic approaches to suicidal ideation and behaviour. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The
International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 503–518). Chichester: Wiley.
Heilbron, N., Franklin, J., Guerry, J., & Prinstein, M. (2014). Social and ecological approaches to suicidal behaviours and non-suicidal self-
injury. In M. Nock (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Suicide and Self-Injury (pp. 206–234). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jacobs, D. (Ed). (1999). The Harvard Medical School Guide to Suicide Assessment and Intervention. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Jobes, D. A. (2006). Managing Suicide Risk: A Collaborative Approach. New York: Guilford.
Kerkhof, A. (2000). Attempted suicide. Patterns and trends. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The International Handbook of
Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 49–64). Chichester: Wiley.
Kerkhof, A., & Arensman, E. (2009). Attempted suicide and deliberate self-harm: epidemiology and risk factors. In. M. Gelder, N.
Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, & J. Geddes (Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry (Second Edition, Volume 1, Section 4.15.1, pp. 951–957).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Linehan, M. (2000). Behavioural treatments of suicidal behaviours. Definitional obfuscation and treatment outcomes. In R. Maris, S.
Canetto, J. McIntosh, & M. Silverman (Eds.), Review of Suicidology 2000 (pp. 84-111). New York: Guilford.
Linehan, M. M., Comtois, K. A., Brown, M. Z., Heard, H. L., & Wagner, A. (2006). Suicide attempt self-injury interview (SASII):
Development, reliability, and validity of a scale to assess suicide attempts and intentional self-injury. Psychological Assessment, 18, 303-
312.
Linehan, M., Goodstein, J., Nielson, S., & Chiles, J. (1983). Reasons for staying alive when you are thinking of killing yourself. The Reasons
for Living Inventory. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 880-881. Available at http://www.brtc.psych.washington.edu/
framePublications.htm
Linehan, M., Rizvi, S., Welch, S., & Page, B. (2000). Psychiatric aspects of suicidal behaviour: Personality disorders. In K. Hawton & K. van
Heeringen (Eds.), The International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 147-178). Chichester: Wiley.
Lonnqvist, J. (2009a). Epidemiology and causes of suicide. In. M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, & J. Geddes (Eds.), New Oxford
Textbook of Psychiatry (Second Edition, Volume 1, Section 4.15.2, pp. 951-957). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lonnqvist, J. (2000b). Psychiatric aspects of suicidal behaviour: Depression. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The International
Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 107-120). Chichester: Wiley.
McLeod, A. (2013). Suicide and attempted suicide. In M. Power (Ed.), Mood Disorders. A Handbook of Science and Practice (Second Edition,
pp. 413-431). Chichester: Wiley.
Murphy, G. (2000). Psychiatric aspects of suicidal behaviour: Substance abuse. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The International
Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 135-146). Chichester: Wiley.
Nezu, A., Nezu, C., D'Zurilla, T., & Nezu, A. (2013). Problem Solving Therapy. A Treatment Manual. New York: Springer.
NICE. (2004). Self-Harm. The Short-Term Physical and Psychological Management and Secondary Prevention of Self-Harm in Primary And
Secondary Care (Clinical Guideline 16). London: Author.


NICE. (2011). Self-Harm. The Longer-Term Management (Clinical Guideline 133). London: Author.
Nock, M. (Ed.). (2014). Oxford Handbook of Suicide and Self-Injury. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nock, M., Holmberg, B., Photis, V., & Michel, B. (2007). Self-injurious thoughts and behaviours interview: Development, reliability, and
validity in an adolescent sample. Psychological Assessment, 19, 309-317.
Nock, M., Millner, A., Deming, C., & Glenn, C. (2014). Depression and suicide. In I. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of Depression
(Third Edition, pp. 448-468). New York: Guilford.
Parker, H. (2014). Survivors of suicide. In M. Nock (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Suicide and Self-Injury (pp. 479-501). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Paykel, E., Prusoff, B., & Meyers, J. (1975). Suicide attempts and recent life events. A controlled comparison. Archives of General Psychiatry,
32, 327-333
Reynolds, W. (1991). Adult Suicidal Ideation Questionnaire. Professional Manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Reynolds, W., & Mazza, J. (1992). Suicidal Behaviour History Form: Clinician's Guide. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Rudd, M., & Joiner, T. (1998). The assessment management and treatment of suicidality; towards clinically Informed and balanced
standards of Care. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 5, 135-150.
Rudd, M., Joiner, T., Jobes, D., & King, C. (1999). The outpatient treatment of suicidality: An integration of science and recognition of its
limitations. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 30, 437-446.
Sakinofsky, I. (2000). Repetition of suicidal behaviour. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The International Handbook of Suicide and
Attempted Suicide (pp. 385-404). Chichester: Wiley.
Saunders, K.E.A., & Hawton, K. (2009). The role of psychopharmacology in suicide prevention. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 18,
172-178.


Selby, E., Joiner, T., Jr, & Ribeiro, J. (2014). Comprehensive theories of suicidal behaviours. In M. Nock (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
Suicide and Self-Injury (pp. 286-307). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sherman, R., D'Orio, B., Rhodes, M., Gantt, S., & Kaslow, N. (2014). Racial/ethnic, spiritual/religious, and sexual orientation influences on
suicidal. In M. Nock (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Suicide and Self-Injury (pp. 265-385). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simon, R., & Hales, R. (2012). The American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of Suicide Assessment and Management (Second Edition).
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Stack, S. (2000). Sociological research into suicide. In D. Lester (Ed.), Suicide Prevention. Resources for the Millennium (pp. 17-29).
Philadelphia, PA: Brunner Routledge.
van Heeringen, K., Hawton, K., & Williams, J. (2000). Pathways to suicide: An integrative approach. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen
(Eds.), The International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 223-236). Chichester: Wiley.
Verkes, R., & Cowen, P. (2000). Pharmacotherapy of suicidal ideation and behaviour. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The
International Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 487-502). Chichester: Wiley.
Walsh, G., Sara, G., Ryan, C. J., & Large, M. (2015). Meta-analysis of suicide rates among psychiatric in-patients. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 131, 174-184.
Ward-Ciesielski, E., & Linehan, M. (2014). Psychological treatment of suicidal behaviours. In M. Nock (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
Suicide and Self-Injury (pp. 367-384). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weishaar, M. (2000). Cognitive risk factors in suicide. In R. Maris, S. Canetto, J. McIntosh, & M. Silverman (Eds.), Review of Suicidology
2000 (pp. 112–139). New York: Guilford.
Wenzel, A., & Spokas, M. (2014). Cognitive and information processing approaches to understanding suicidal behaviours. In M. Nock
(Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Suicide and Self-Injury (pp. 235-254). Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Williams, J., & Pollock, L. (2000). The psychology of suicidal behaviour. In K. Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The International
Handbook of Suicide and Attempted Suicide (pp. 79-94). Chichester: Wiley.
World Health Organization. (2014). Preventing Suicide: A Global Imperative. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.


Chapter 12 Anger
Raymond W. Novaco and John Taylor
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-12
Case study
Tim was a 25-year-old man with a history of serious sexual aggression against male and female children. At the age of 15, he was convicted
of the rape of a 12-year-old girl, for which he spent 2 years in youth custody. Within a year of release, he carried out a series of indecent
assaults on two 12- and 13-year-old boys. Following conviction for these offences Tim was admitted to an acute low secure hospital facility
under sections 37/41 of the UK Mental Health Act 1983 on the grounds of "mental impairment" as defined within the Act. Tim had a
measured full scale IQ of 77, which placed him in the "borderline intelligence" range. He had attended mainstream school until the age of 10,
when he was transferred to a local special needs school because of his learning difficulties.
Tim was the second youngest of six children, brought up by his parents in a seemingly stable home environment, although two of his
siblings were reported as also having special educational needs. By the time he became a teenager Tim's parents had little control over his
unruly and aggressive behaviour, which was apparently activated with minimal provocation. He also began to misuse alcohol and drugs at

that time. While in hospital, Tim continued to have regular and positive contact with his parents and siblings. Unfortunately his father died
4 years after his admission to hospital and this affected him significantly.
About 3 years following hospital admission, Tim absconded with a fellow patient and stole a car, a crime for which they were both
convicted. His progress in hospital was very patchy, with reports by ward nursing staff of frequent aggression and violence towards other
patients; sexual aggression towards male and female patients; numerous absconsions from the hospital site; and generally uncooperative,
antisocial and care-seeking attitudes and behaviour.
Prior to being considered for anger treatment, Tim had received two programmes of psychological intervention. Shortly following his
admission he had responded positively to an individual behavioural intervention aimed at reducing levels of interpersonal conflict between
him and other patients and direct care staff. He appeared to benefit from the structure and boundaries that this approach provided and
was motivated by the sense of success he experienced, along with the positive attention from clinical staff that was associated with
this improvement. Two years after his admission, Tim commenced, and ultimately completed, a sex offender treatment programme that
involved 70 sessions of group therapy over a period of 3 years. His responses to the specific elements of this treatment were mixed, but
it emerged during this treatment that his sex offending behaviour, along with his general aggression and violence towards others, was
strongly associated with anger control difficulties. Tim agreed that it might be beneficial for him to do some work on this particular problem
area.
Before treatment Tim completed the Spielberger State Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI; Spielberg, 1996) and the Novaco Anger
Scale and Provocation Inventory (NAS and PI; Novaco, 1994, 2003). His scores on both of these self-report instruments indicated high levels
of anger compared to others in the patient population. His scores on measures of anger disposition, reactivity and expression were between
0.7 and 1.5 standard deviations above the mean for his forensic inpatient reference group (Novaco & Taylor, 2004). The anger psychometric
measures are described later in the chapter. Using an informant rating scale, ward staff assessed Tim as demonstrating a range of behaviours
associated with "dissocial" and "emotionally unstable - impulsive type" personality disorder characteristics.


Tim consented to take part in an 18-session individualised cognitive-behavioural anger treatment specially designed for people with
developmental disabilities and offending histories. The first six sessions constitute a "preparatory" phase of treatment aimed at engaging
and motivating clients, building the basic skills required for the treatment approach (e.g. self-monitoring) and providing opportunities
for experiencing success. Perhaps unsurprisingly, given Tim's previous response to a structured and containing treatment approach, he
responded well to this component of the treatment. In particular, as part of a "decision matrix" exercise, he was able to identify readily
the costs of remaining angry and aggressive and weigh these against the benefits of developing more appropriate ways of coping with
and expressing his anger. At the end of this preparatory phase, Tim was motivated to continue with the next, more challenging phase of
treatment.
The 12-session "treatment" phase follows a more customary cognitive-behaviour therapy (CBT) approach. It gives equal weight to
modifying anger-maintaining cognitive distortions, the development of arousal reduction techniques and the rehearsal of prosocial anger
coping skills within a sequential, but integrated framework. The development of a shared formulation of the client's anger problems is
pivotal in this approach. Tim was able to work with the therapist to identify priority areas for targeting during the treatment. These areas
related to the particular types of situations likely to provoke anger arousal in him, the automatic thinking style that followed once his anger
was activated, and his characteristic emotional and behavioural responses to such arousal. Together these make up Tim's "anger signature,"
and treatment was aimed at helping him recognise and modify it.
During treatment, Tim progressively improved his tendency to ruminate about anger provocations, and he reduced the intensity of
his anger arousal and the impulsiveness of his behavioural reactions. He perhaps showed greatest progress in modifying his thinking in
response to situations in which he perceived that he had experienced injustice and disrespect at the hands of others.
Tim enthusiastically embraced the concepts of "thought catching," and thinking differently about situations by putting himself in others'
shoes. His ability to implement this approach in vivo, in temporal conjunction with provocation events, was reflected in the "thinking
differently" sections of his daily anger log recordings.


His progress in treatment is reflected in clinically significant decreases in post-treatment anger assessment scores, which were maintained
in 1-month and 8-month follow-ups. These are presented in Table 12.1. With the empirical frame of reference being data on these
psychometric measures obtained from 129 male patients in the same forensic hospital (Novaco & Taylor, 2004), the change in Tim's scores
from pre-treatment to post-treatment constitute reductions of 3.3 standard deviations on the NAS, 2.8 standard deviations on the PI, 2.1
standard deviations on STAXI Anger Expression, and .8 standard deviations on STAXI Trait Anger.
These self-reported changes in anger disposition, reactivity, and expression were buttressed by the clinical impressions of ward staff. His
key worker reported that following anger treatment "there has been a marked improvement in the way Tim handles difficult situations. He
tends to think rather than react, and afterwards discusses his feelings with staff." Various aspects of clinical change that occurred with Tim
will be given throughout this chapter to illustrate components of the treatment procedure.
Table 12.1 Tim's anger treatment evaluation scores
Anger measure
Assessment point
Pre- treatment
Post-treatment
1-month follow-up
8-month follow-up
Novaco Anger Scale
Cognitive
40
26
25
27
Arousal
39
18
17
16
Behaviour
41
21
20
24


Total
120
65
62
66
Provocation Inventory
80
35
32
29
Spielberger STAXI
Trait Anger
20
15
11
12
Anger Expression
39
16
14
19
Imaginal Provocation Test
Anger Composite
36
17
—
—
Note: All assessments were administered by assistant psychologists independent of the therapist, using a structured interview format.

Introduction
Interest in anger control has gained prominence in recent decades both in the general culture of Western societies and in clinical scientific
literature (Beck, 1999; DiGiuseppe & Tafrate, 2007). As emotion garnered broad attention in psychological research and theory, enthusiasm
for the study of anger grew strongly, especially in conjunction with cardiovascular diseases (Chesney & Rosenman, 1985; Siegman & Smith,
1994). Interest also mounted in broad-based efforts to find remedies for violent behaviour. In popular media, road rage metastasised into
air rage, cinema rage, golf rage, rink rage, surf rage, trolley rage, and royal rage. Anger management became a frequent prescription given
by social gatekeepers, such as judicial officers, school administrators, mental health system directors, and prison and probation authorities.
Thus, mental health professionals in many service delivery domains have now become familiar with client anger problems and have
explored approaches to improving their clinical care capacity in this regard. Dissemination of programmes has occurred in schools, clinics,
hospitals, and prisons, especially of CBT interventions, with varying degrees of systematisation in implementation. Presented in this chapter
are information on the dimensions of anger problems, a summary of research on anger treatment, information on assessment and selection


of clients for anger treatments, and an outline of a CBT approach to anger treatment. Our treatment is based on a differentiated assessment of
anger dyscontrol, incorporates an explicit treatment engagement component, and delivers a treatment that fosters self-regulation and gives
diligent attention to the psychosocial context and the care system (Taylor & Novaco, 2005).
Our attention to the provision of anger treatment concerns clinical populations with complex problems, such as the conjunction
of impoverished family background, developmental disability, early conduct problems, substance use, serious offence history,
institutionalisation, reoffending, amalgamative emotional distress, and recurrent challenging behaviour for mental health care staff. At
the beginning of the chapter, we have presented one such complex case, who has been a participant in a conjoined anger assessment and
treatment project involving male forensic patients with intellectual disabilities (Novaco & Taylor, 2004, 2015; Taylor et al., 2002, 2005).
The successful treatment of persons having such multilayered difficulties in regulating anger and aggression bodes well for downward
extensions to clients with less severe anger problems and less resource impairment.
Clinical features of anger control problems
As a normal human emotion, anger has considerable adaptive value, although there are socio-cultural variations in the acceptability of its
expression and the form that such expression takes. In the face of adversity, it can mobilise psychological resources, energise behaviours
for corrective action, and facilitate perseverance. Anger serves as a guardian to self-esteem, operates as a means of communicating negative
sentiment, potentiates the ability to redress grievances, and boosts determination to overcome obstacles to our happiness and aspirations.
Akin to aggressive behaviour, anger has functional value for survival.
For some clients, anger may be troublesome simply as a problem of psychosocial adjustment to stressful life circumstances. However,
anger is a feature of a wide range of more problematic disorders encountered by clinical professionals in diverse settings. It is commonly
observed in various personality, psychosomatic, and conduct disorders, in schizophrenia, in bipolar mood disorders, in organic brain


disorders, in impulse control dysfunctions, and in a variety of conditions resulting from trauma (Novaco, 2010). The central characteristic
of anger in the context of such problem conditions is that it is "dysregulated." Its activation, expression, and experience occurs without
appropriate controls. This normal emotion, having no automatic status as a problem, becomes problematic by virtue of the adverse
consequences to self and others that result from it and its reciprocal links to life stress, psychopathology, and harm-doing behaviour.
Anger's social distancing effect (it pushes people away) is an obstacle to therapeutic change efforts, the recipients of real-life anger
interventions have been highly diverse in problem condition, for example, domestic violence perpetrators, traffic offenders, children
with conduct problems, quarrelsome neighbours, explosive felons, and persons with various psychiatric disorders being offered anger
management as supplementary care. Nine meta-analyses of anger treatment efficacy have now been published (Beck & Fernandez, 1998; Del
Vecchio & O'Leary, 2004; DiGiuseppe & Tafrate, 2003; Edmonson & Conger, 1996; Gansle, 2005; Ho et al., 2010; Saini, 2009; Sukhodolsky
et al., 2004; Tafrate, 1995). The overall finding is of a "medium effect size," which means that approximately 75% of people receiving anger
treatment improve significantly more than do those in comparison treatment conditions.
Providing services for people having recurrent anger problems is a challenging enterprise, as engaging them in the clinical process is
often hard going. Seriously angry people appear to resist treatment, owing to the functional value of their anger routines. Howells and
Day (2003), however, have turned the "treatment resistance" notion on its head, asserting instead that the treatment engagement problem
be understood as a matter of "readiness." They propose that readiness for anger management is affected by an array of impediments: the
complexity of cases presenting with anger problems and their comorbidities, institutional setting conditions, client inferences about their
problem, mandatory treatment, clients' personal goals, cultural differences, and gender differences all bearing on responsivity to provided
programmes. The Howells and Day (2003) analysis is insightful, particularly as it removes the onus of the problem from the dispositional
status of the client. Our provision of the anger treatment "preparatory phase," to be described later, seeks to address many of these core issues
of readiness.


Behavioural-interpersonal features of anger problems
Because anger is a common precursor of aggressive behaviour, it can be unsettling for mental health professionals to engage as a treatment
focus, regardless of its salience as a clinical need. Anger has been found to predict physical aggression by psychiatric hospital patients prior
to admission (e.g. Craig, 1982; McNeil et al., 2003), in the hospital (e.g. Doyle & Dolan, 2006; Novaco, 1994; Novaco & Taylor, 2004; Wang
& Diamond, 1999) and subsequently in the community after discharge (e.g. Doyle et al., 2012; Monahan et al., 2001; Swogger et al., 2012).
Within a hospital, anger and aggression incur a great cost. High levels of direct care staff injuries have been reported in studies done in
secure hospitals in the US (Bensley et al., 1995; Carmel & Hunter, 1989), in the UK (National Audit Office, 2003), in Denmark (Rasmussen et
al., 2013) and in Australia (Cheung et al., 1996). Pertinent to the institutional context for our case study patient, violence faced by staff in
a developmental disability service in the UK was found by Kiely and Pankhurst (1998) to entail nearly five times more incidents of patient-
inflicted injury than the NHS Trust's sister psychiatric service, with 81% of staff reporting physical assault from service users during the
previous 12 months. High turnover rates and burnout have indeed been found to be a consequence of staff exposure to the risk of violence
in developmental disability services (Attwood & Joachim, 1994). Patient anger and aggression thus can be seen to carry heavy costs for a
hospital system that is entrusted with providing security and rehabilitation.
Recurrent anger detracts from adaptive functioning in the contexts of work, family, and social relationships. An angry person is not
optimally alert, thoughtful, empathic, prudent, or appreciative. Anger's embeddedness in other distressed emotions such as shame and guilt
(e.g. Miller & Andrews, 2005; Tangney et al., 1996; Thomaes et al., 2011), as well as its involvement in clinical disorders such as depression
(e.g. Benazzi & Akiskal, 2005; Fava & Rosenbaum, 1999; Kopper & Epperson, 1996), paranoid delusional disorder (e.g. Kennedy et al., 1992;
Ullrich et al., 2013), schizophrenia (e.g. Craig, 1982; Novaco & Whittington, 2013), and trauma (e.g. Andrews et al., 2000; Feeny et al., 2000;
McHugh et al., 2012; Novaco & Chemtob, 2002), further justify giving attention to clients' anger regulatory difficulties.


Physiological features of anger problems
In addition to being an activator of aggressive behaviour, anger can be problematic as an internal stressor, causing wear and tear on the body
when recurrently activated, as reflected in its link to cardiovascular disease (Chesney & Rosenman, 1985; Siegman & Smith, 1994).
Designating anger as a problem condition is less than straightforward. Some have called for a formal designation of "anger
disorders" (DiGiuseppe & Tafrate, 2007; Eckhardt & Deffenbacher, 1995), but their argument is not nosologically persuasive, and anger is
more of a transdiagnostic problem (Novaco, 2010). Further, we should be hesitant to pathologize an emotional state that has important
adaptive functions and is a fundamental survival mechanism with extensions to freedom representational symbolic structures. Given that
anger is a normal human emotion, ascertaining whether a person's anger experiences constitute a psychological problem condition hinges
on the defining parameters. Frequency, intensity, duration, and mode of expression comprise a set of such parameters, about which we will
elaborate later.
Anger response dimensions
The judgement of whether someone has an "anger problem" is dependent on the audience and its sociocultural context. Nevertheless,
how often someone becomes angry, the degree of anger experienced, how long the arousal lasts, and how one behaves when angry are
dimensions by which anger response patterns can be gauged to constitute a problem condition. Our case example, Tim, became angry
frequently, at high intensity, and with prolonged duration, connected with his ruminations; he was also impulsively violent towards other
patients. Clearly, the manifestations of his anger, and its association with substance misuse, sex offending, and absconsions presented a
multilayered problem.

Anger frequency
How often people get angry surely varies culturally, but there is little data in this regard outside of North American samples. The study
of normative patterns of anger began with G. Stanley Hall (1899) and was most extensively undertaken by Averill (1982). A variety of
small sample studies have been conducted, and on the average in this research, people have reported becoming angry two or three times
per week. Data reported by Kassinove et al. (1997) show general comparability between Russian (St. Petersburg) and American (New York)
participants, and no gender differences in anger frequency, which is a common finding. As Novaco and Jarvis (2002) showed in a review and
in examining US General Social Survey data, it is reasonable to infer that someone who reports becoming angry every day, two or three times
a day can be considered high in anger frequency.
Anger intensity
Unlike frequency, degree of anger intensity is more clearly indicative of dysfunction, because high arousal has cognitive interference effects
and high-intensity anger leads to impulsive behaviour, overriding inhibitory controls. Although women and men seem to experience anger
at comparable levels of intensity (e.g. Kopper & Epperson, 1996), even in response to trauma (e.g. Ehlers et al., 1998), men more often judge
their anger intensity from their behaviour in an anger episode, while women are more inclined to weigh anger duration in judging their
anger intensity (Frost & Averill, 1982). Persons with high anger dispositions are inclined to believe that their anger reactions are justified
and readily defend their entitlement to anger on any occasion (i.e. the frequency of their anger episodes). In contrast, they can be more easily
induced to consider that the anger reaction they did have was perhaps too strong.
Duration
The intensity of anger can be expected to influence anger duration, as greater elevation in physiological arousal is associated with longer

time for recovery to baseline and because strong anger can escalate and extend as a product of angry behaviour. Another reason is that
strongly bothersome events are likely to linger and not be resolved promptly, thus fostering rumination that prolongs anger and can revivify
it.
The prolongation of anger arousal has several problematic consequences. First, blood pressure is significantly affected by prolonged anger
and its non-expression, and this is a substantial factor in essential hypertension (Johnson, 1990). Second, when anger arousal does not
return to baseline, there are likely to be "excitation transfer" effects, whereby the undissipated arousal adds to arousal activation from new
sources and raises the probability of aggressive behaviour (Zillmann & Bryant, 1974). Third, rumination about anger incidents interferes
with optimal functioning and lessens positive inputs that are fortifying to the self. Anger rumination is getting increased attention (e.g.
Sukhodolsky et al., 2001).
Mode of expression
A defining characteristic of anger is the engagement of antagonistic behaviour. Whether someone acts in an explicitly aggressive manner in
any particular circumstance will vary with many factors, but is largely affected by inhibitory controls, internal and external. To be sure, the
behavioural manifestation of anger is the clinical problem parameter having greatest societal import.
Anger impels both verbal and physical aggression. Verbal aggression pertains to threatening, abusive and derogatory statements, the
common denominator of which is to produce distress in the target person. Physical aggression, which is overt behaviour intended to produce
harm or damage, may be either directed at the provoking person or displaced to a substitute target. Anger can also motivate "passive"
aggression, which is harm-doing behaviour in a disguised form - pretended congeniality, deliberate interpersonal coldness, or neglect,
having the intention of producing distress in the target person. Alternatively, it may be expressed in constructively minded problem-
solving behaviour or be given safe ventilation as a self-control tactic (e.g. removing oneself from a high-conflict situation and, in seclusion,
shouting to an ethereal audience). When anger is suppressed by inhibitory mechanisms and there is no effective resolution of the instigating

circumstances, the other three parameters (frequency, intensity and duration) will be affected. Dysregulated anger is a driver of violent
offending (Novaco, 2011).
Summary of research on response to anger treatment
Research on anger treatment efficacy continues to lag far behind that for depression and anxiety. After CBT for anger was first implemented
and evaluated by Novaco (1975, 1977), some controlled studies followed the stress inoculation approach (for a review of these, see Novaco,
1997, and Novaco & Jarvis, 2002), and other more generic CBT approaches were adopted (e.g. Deffenbacher et al., 1987; Feindler et al., 1986;
Feindler & Ecton, 1986; Hazaleus & Deffenbacher, 1986). In nine meta-analyses of anger treatment studies, many of the studies involved
college student samples (Beck & Fernandez, 1998; Del Vecchio & O'Leary, 2004; DiGiuseppe & Tafrate, 2003; Edmonson & Conger, 1996;
Gansle, 2005; Ho et al., 2010; Saini, 2009; Sukhodolsky et al., 2004; Tafrate, 1995). All of the meta-analyses fail to include published case
study reports and multiple baseline studies that have involved clients with serious problems. Contemporary approaches to anger treatment
can be gleaned from a case conference led by Santanello (2011) and a study with combat veterans by Shea et al. (2013). Most assuredly,
more controlled treatment studies are needed with seriously disordered populations, with rigorous multimode assessment designs and with
attention to the reduction of aggressive behaviour as an outcome criterion.
Little is known about the efficacy of anger treatment in reducing violence, either in hospital or in the community. Lindsay and his
colleagues with clients in the community (Lindsay et al., 2003, 2004) and Taylor et al. (2005) with hospitalised patients have reported
successful anger treatment outcomes with clients having serious aggression problems. Very notably, the results of Lindsay and his
colleagues included lower re-offence and aggressive incident rates on follow-up for persons who had received anger treatment. For persons
like Tim with intellectual disabilities, anger treatment studies, including those by Lindsay and colleagues, were reviewed by Taylor and
Novaco (2013). Since that review, Willner et al. (2013) reported a cluster randomised control trial of a group-based anger intervention


for clients with intellectual disabilities in day services, finding that those in the treatment condition had significantly lower levels of
challenging behaviour, but there were no differences on their aggressive behaviour measure. Providing good news on the violence reduction
front, Novaco and Taylor (2015), in the first study to show violence reduction in hospital in conjunction with anger treatment, reported
significant declines in physically assaultive behaviour in hospital associated with anger treatment, and the amount of the reduction in
assaults was related to the degree that anger declined over the course of anger treatment in a forensic hospital.
Regarding forensic populations, it must be said that few controlled treatment outcome evaluation studies have been conducted, despite
the common implementation of anger management in prison settings. Extensive outcome studies conducted in prisons in Western
Australia by Howells and his colleagues (e.g. Heseltine et al., 2010; Watt & Howells, 1999) have produced discouraging results. These
have been group-based interventions conducted with violent offenders in maximum- and minimum-security prisons, with the anger
management programme consisting of 10 2-hour sessions delivered over 5 weeks. They have highlighted anger problem complexity and
insufficient intensity of treatment as potential sources of ineffectiveness and have found that anger declined when "treatment readiness"
was present. Although concerns have been raised about anger treatment not being efficacious with violent offender populations, some of
the scepticism has not been well grounded (Novaco, 2013), and there is reason for optimism, including the violence reduction results of the
Novaco and Taylor (2015) study, as well as in studies showing anger treatment gains for clients with serious disorders, such as Shea et al.
(2013).
We hope that the assessment and treatment provision contents of the present chapter will be useful in guiding future system-
wide intervention studies. The cognitive-behavioural treatment of anger has been shown to have applicability to a wide range of client
populations. Anger dysregulation is associated with many clinical disorders, and in addition to it being indicative of subjective distress,
self-report of anger is predictive of violent behaviour (Novaco, 2011). Hospitalised patients with long-standing aggression histories, mental
disorder, and even intellectual disabilities can be engaged in CBT anger treatment and have been shown to benefit. While therapeutic


mechanisms underlying treatment gains, and their sustainability and generalisability are not clear, we are fortified in seeking further
advances in providing remedies for clinical problems of anger dyscontrol.
Assessment of anger problem parameters
The judgement of whether someone has an "anger problem" is dependent on the audience and its sociocultural context. Nevertheless,
how often someone becomes angry, the degree of anger experienced, how long the arousal lasts, and how one behaves when angry are
dimensions by which a person's anger response patterns can be gauged to constitute a problem condition. Our case example, Tim, became
angry frequently, at high intensity, and with prolonged duration, connected with his rumination tendencies; he was also impulsively violent
towards other patients. Clearly, the manifestations of his anger, and its association with substance misuse, sex offending and absconsions
presented a multilayered problem.
Anger frequency
As outlined earlier with reference to the review by Novaco & Jarvis (2002), someone who reports becoming angry every day, two or three
times a day can be considered high in anger frequency.
Anger intensity
Ratings of anger intensity are a typical feature of anger psychometrics, such as Spielberger's (1996) State Trait Anger Expression Inventory
(STAXI) and the Provocation Inventory (PI; Novaco, 2003). It is assumed that higher intensity ratings are indicative of greater disturbance,
because the ratings are summed across items. Indeed, the intensity dimension functions as a qualitative discrimination, because we partly
judge that we are angry, as opposed to being "upset," "bothered" or "annoyed" by virtue of the affect intensity.


Anger intensity is a point of leverage for examining "anger costs" to motivate treatment engagement and for making early inroads into
anger control by means of arousal reduction techniques easily learned by clients, such as deep breathing and muscle relaxation.
Anger intensity assessment can be done with various psychometric measures, such as the STAXI (Spielberger, 1996) or the NAS and PI
(Novaco, 2003). The PI, in this regard, has an advantage, as it is an anger situational inventory and can facilitate an interview with the client
about his or her anger experiences. This can be a very useful starting point with someone having difficulties disclosing or discussing anger
control problems. On the PI, the person rates anger intensity on a 1 to 4 scale with regard to 25 common situations of provocation. Both
high and low anger-rated items are informative. With the completed PI in hand, the clinician can first focus on the items endorsed as high-
anger situations, asking the client to describe a recent experience in those situations and encouraging a full account of the episode. The
incident account can provide useful information about cognitive structures affecting the perception of the event, the triggering elements
and the person's style of responding. Low-anger items are also useful, as they convey that the person does not get angry in all situations
and giving some attention to these helps to overcome defensiveness. Low-anger items are also a basis for identifying coping skills and
anger attenuating variables. The very act of talking about the hypothetical anger situations on the PI in a receptive and non-threatening
atmosphere can help a person become comfortable with such discussions and to adopt an active role in the helping process.
Duration
Duration of anger, as well as rumination, are assessed by the NAS (Novaco, 2003). This measure can straightforwardly be obtained in clinical
interview, giving added attention to the client's post-episode social functioning and conflict resolution strategies.
Someone who continues to dwell on anger experiences may also be imagining violent retaliation. A very useful assessment device in
that regard is Grisso's Schedule for Imagined Violence (Grisso et al., 2000). In their study of over 1,100 psychiatric patients, Grisso et al.
(2000) found that the NAS cognitive, arousal and behavioural subscales were very strongly related to imagined violence, especially the NAS
cognitive subscale.

For Tim in our case study, an aversive experience readily mapped onto an existing anger schema of being unfairly treated (also connected
to a self-schema of diminished personal worth). The anger had strong intensity and, in Tim's socio-physical circumstances, he was prone to
ruminate about being "picked on," prolonging his anger experience.
As recorded in his anger log, Tim had had some friction with a member of staff. When asked by the therapist to describe what had
happened, the account was as follows:
Tim: Well, there was a mix-up about what time my drama session finished. I came back to the ward earlier than I should have 'cause the
session finished early. The staff said I was lying.
Therapist (T): OK. And what were you thinking about when this happened? What thoughts were going through your mind?
Tim: I'm thinking to myself, "I did nothing wrong. Why me? It's always me that gets into bother - no one else. They're always picking on
me."
T: Right. And how were you feeling at this time?
Tim: Raging. I'm furious.
T: Out of ten, how much would you say?
Tim: Ten out of ten!
Mode of expression
Regarding assessment of this mode of expression parameter, case record data are intrinsically useful, as the person's problematic behaviour
is often duly noted and characterised for its stylistic features. There are several useful psychometric scales that differentiate mode
of expression. The STAXI's Anger Expression subscales differentiate Anger In, Anger Out, and Anger Control (Spielberger, 1996). The
Aggression Questionnaire (AQ; Buss & Perry, 1992) has subscales for Verbal Aggression and Physical Aggression, as well as for Anger and
Hostility. The NAS Behavioural subscale has content category dimensions of impulsivity, verbal aggression, physical aggression and indirect


expression, for which scores can be examined clinically (Novaco, 2003). A review of measures of anger and hostility can be found in Eckhardt
et al. (2004).
Returning to our case example, when the therapist enquired about how Tim responded to the staff challenging his explanation about
getting back to the ward early, he said:
Tim Ha! I shouted and swore at 'em. Told them to "eff off." I argued with them and threatened to make a complaint.
T So, how well do you think you handled this situation?
Tim Really bad. No good at all.
The high-intensity anger overrode inhibitory control, resulting in impulsive verbal aggression that would have adverse consequences. It is
significant that Tim recognised that his angry behaviour was problematic and in need of change. This is probably because when this episode
occurred, he had already begun to engage in treatment.
Treatment engagement
Anger costs: prompting motivation for treatment
Treatment engagement follows from recognition that the costs of staying the same outweigh the costs of trying to be different. How
sensitised a client is to the costs of recurrent anger reactions can be assessed from three lines of enquiry: (1) the degree to which he or she is
aware of personal anger pattern features, (2) the degree of investment in anger habits and (3) the degree to which the client is troubled by the
experiential correlates and social products of his or her anger reactions.
Awareness of anger pattern features
At the core of anger dyscontrol problems is a deficiency in self-monitoring. Being aware of becoming angry, of the level of anger intensity, of


the behavioural routines associated with episodes of anger, and of the instrumentality or gains produced by the routines is fundamental to
self-regulation. Helping the client to see the reciprocity of anger in personal relationships and the detrimental effects that anger has on well-
being are also important steps in shaping anger cost awareness.
Investment in anger habits
Reluctance to change follows from strong investment in anger routines. The degree of investment in anger can be detected from the
person's inclination to externalise blame, quickness in justification for anger reactions, and belief in the efficacy of anger in responding
to interpersonal conflict. The person's ability to consider constructive coping alternatives, as well as his or her inclination to use such
alternatives, are also important to consider in assessing investment in anger habits and readiness to change.
Concern about anger experiential correlates
Most typically, clients' concern is prompted by the consequences that their angry behaviour has produced, such as loss of a relationship,
judicial system sanctions, or job difficulties. Sensitivity to social disapproval and valuation of negative feedback from significant others bears
substantially on self-regulation. The person may be troubled by states of tension, agitation, and irritability that demarcate anger or the
ruminations and preoccupations that accompany anger.
Ascertaining recognition of the costs of anger can be done in a structured interview. For example, to learn about the client's awareness of
anger patterns features, one might ask:
• What happens when you get angry?
• Would anyone know that you are angry?
• What are some signs that you are getting angry that others could see?


The client's responses to such questions can be followed with:
• How do other people react when you get angry?
• What do you make of that?
The person's degree of investment in anger habits and concern about experiential correlates can be approached by questions such as:
• When you get really angry, what happens to you afterwards?
• What thoughts do you have?
• Do you ever wish that you had reacted differently?
• How would your life be different, if you did not get angry so much?
• What would you lose?
• What would you gain?
For many clients, readiness for therapeutic change must be enhanced through guided intervention that patiently induces motivation.
Heightening recognition of anger costs is part of the anger treatment "preparatory phase" that we have developed to facilitate treatment
engagement (see also Novaco, 1997; Renwick et al., 1997). It was predated and more fully elaborated by the "stages of change" model put
forward by Prochaska and DiClemente (1983) and the motivational interviewing approach of Miller and Rollnick (1991). Here, to convey
how we assist the client in identifying anger costs, some material from our case example is illustrative. This is taken from a "decision matrix"
exercise in Tim's preparatory phase work, occurring in session five of the six-session procedure. That session explores the costs and benefits

of anger and aggression, both in the short and long terms, aiming to help the client to understand that the benefits of developing self-control
over anger and aggression outweigh the believed benefits of these routines.
In the "decision matrix" exercise, Tim referred to a situation he had recently recorded in his anger logs. This involved a friend (fellow
patient) questioning his sexuality. This had made him angry, and he shouted and swore at his friend; as a result, ward staff admonished him.
Tim was asked to think about the immediate benefits of being aggressive in this situation. He explained that by reacting in this way: "I got
the anger out of my system stopped my mate from taking the mick out of me and showed to the others [patients] that I'm not a soft
touch."
Despite the immediate benefits of the verbal aggression in release of the angry feelings, Tim was unable to identify any long-term
advantages of behaving in this way. In the supportive context provided by the therapist, he was able to list many short- and long-term
disadvantages of being angry and aggressive. Short-term consequences included getting into trouble with ward staff, losing points on the
ward incentive scheme, falling out with his friend, and the possibility that if the situation escalated, he and/or his friend might get hurt.
Moreover, Tim's could identify longer-term problems associated with this style of responding, such as getting a bad reputation, letting
people down (family, friends and staff), feeling ashamed and losing the trust and concern of carers. Using a worksheet depicting a set of
scales, Tim readily weighed the costs of continuing to be aggressive against the costs of attempting to learn to respond to his anger in a
calmer and more constructive manner.

Preparatory phase of anger treatment
An enlightened presentation of the many issues involved in readiness for anger therapy can be found in Howells and Day (2003), whose
differentiation of impediments was noted earlier and who also discuss matters of therapeutic alliance, responsivity and prospective
modification of therapeutic approach. In addition to what they denote, it can also be said that prospective participants in anger treatment
often lack a number of prerequisites for optimal involvement in a self-regulatory, coping skills intervention programme. Clients may have

had some training in arousal control and thus may not have difficulty in identifying emotions or differentiating degrees of anger intensity.
But they may be unaccustomed to making self-observations about their thoughts, feelings and behaviour in rudimentary self-monitoring.
Many may not recognise the degree to which thoughts, emotions and behaviour are interconnected. For others, however, such educational
aspects of the preparatory phase are of less importance than the engagement issues.
The preparatory phase is thus constructed to "prime" the client motivationally and to establish basic skills of emotion identification,
self-monitoring, communication about anger experiences and arousal reduction. It serves to build trust in the therapist and the treatment
programme, providing an atmosphere conducive to personal disclosure and to the collaboration required by this therapeutic approach. The
latter includes building a common language about the model of anger that guides the treatment (Novaco, 1994). While designed to be
relatively non-probing and non-challenging, for some institutionalised patients it can elicit distress, as it raises vulnerability issues for them
(Novaco et al., 2000). Consequently, intersession follow-up meetings with patients may be needed to support them in coping with the impact
of the sessions. Because the preparatory phase can be pitched to the client as a "trial period," its conclusion then leads to a more explicit
and informed choice by the client about starting treatment proper. In effect, there is a bit of sleight-of-hand at play here in presenting the
"preparatory phase" to the client as something to "try out," in the sense of it not being the "real treatment," when indeed it is.
Formulation of anger problems
It commonly occurs that people are referred for anger treatment inappropriately, which typically happens in conjunction with concern
about the person's violent behaviour. Not all violent offenders are candidates for anger treatment interventions. Howells (1989) cogently
discussed the issue of suitability of clients for anger management interventions and provided case illustrations of congruities and
incongruities. He states that anger treatment is not indicated for those whose violent behaviour is not emotionally mediated, whose violent
behaviour fits their short-term or long-term goal structure, or whose violence is anger mediated but not acknowledged. The latter condition
is sought to be remedied by the "preparatory phase" component, but at the outset one must resolve the issue of whether the person's

problematic behaviour, violent or otherwise, is an anger regulatory problem, implying that the acquisition or augmentation of anger control
coping skills would reduce its probability.
At the time of segue to treatment, the therapist should have collated anger assessment data to construct a formulation of the client's
anger regulatory problem and the treatment targets. That information should be derived from multiple sources and modes of assessment:
(1) clinical interview with the client, significant others, and clinical team or case workers; (2) self-report psychometric scales, such as the
NAS-PI, STAXI or AQ, and also anger diary recordings, for which there are various formats (e.g. for adolescents in residential treatment, see
Feindler & Ecton, 1986); (3) behavioural observation ratings, which can be provided by ward staff, such as the Staff Observation Aggression
Scale, which has been revised as SOAS-R (Nijman et al., 1999) or the Ward Anger Rating Scale (Novaco, 1994; Novaco & Renwick, 2003);
(4) coding of case files and incident reports (Novaco & Taylor, 2004); and possibly (5) structured provocation testing, which can done via
imaginal provocation procedures (Novaco, 1975; Taylor et al., 2004).
As a general principle, it should be kept in mind that anger is an abstract construct that has many observable referents, none of which
constitutes a "pure" index of anger. Proper assessment requires various modes of observation. For clinical purposes, multiple anger measures
should be obtained, and assessments should be made at different points in time. Attention should be given to minimising contextual factors
that are likely to impair validity, particularly as anger assessment is vulnerable to problems of reactivity, that is, the person responding
to inferences about the test situation, as opposed to responding to the explicit elements of the testing. Anger assessment, particularly in
forensic settings, is prone to "masking," referring to clients' inclination to produce responses in anticipation of what those responses will
mean to some audience.
Assessment of the anger regulatory problem is an ongoing process, as the therapist progressively works towards an individual anger
problem formulation. During the first two or three sessions of the treatment phase, clients are encouraged to work on an external events ×
internal processes × behavioural responses analysis of their anger problems in order to reach a shared formulation of their difficulties. In the
case of Tim, material from completed anger logs, from situations he described for his personal anger hierarchy, and from his profile of scores

on the NAS and PI were used to reach a shared view of the key problems for him in controlling his anger and priorities for treatment. These
were collaboratively organised within a simplified conceptual framework.
The situations about which Tim was most sensitive and strongly anger-reactive were those in which he was accused of doing things he
had not done (unfairness/injustice). The types of thoughts that most characterised Tim's cognitive responses to such situations were "I
want to hit him... I should hit him... he deserves it" (justification). Moreover, he indicated that these thoughts "go round and round in my
head" (rumination). The feelings of anger that accompanied this type of situation were typically very strong (high intensity) and stayed
with Tim for a prolonged period of time (long duration). His behavioural reactions in these circumstances were typically to swear and
shout (verbal aggression) or to grab the other person and threaten him (impulsive confrontation). It was agreed with Tim that these would
be the areas of focus in treatment, applying cognitive restructuring, arousal reduction and behavioural skills training techniques for anger
reduction. This shared formulation is of central importance. It is intrinsic to the collaborative emphasis given in CBT to promote self-control
skills, especially the stress inoculation approach (Meichenbaum, 1985), and it is pivotal to enabling the client to extend treatment gains after
completing therapy.
Treatment of anger control problems
Levels of anger treatment intervention
Psychotherapeutic interventions for anger occur at several levels, which have different aims and degrees of sophistication. Intervention
levels reflect the degree of systematisation, complexity, and depth of therapeutic approach. Increased depth is associated with greater
individual tailoring to client needs. Correspondingly, greater specialisation in techniques and in clinical supervision is required with more
complex levels of intervention. These levels of intervention are fully delineated in Novaco et al. (2000) and summarised here. These levels
include (1) general clinical care for anger, (2) anger management and (3) anger treatment.


General clinical care for anger
At this level, anger is identified as a relevant treatment issue and addressed as part of a wider mental health care programme involving
counselling, psychodynamic therapies, cognitive and behavioural therapies, and/or psychopharmacology applied in an individual, couple,
family or group format. General clinical care for anger, when its operational characteristics are explicitly designated, may indeed serve as a
comparison condition for experimental anger treatment. This was done by Chemtob et al. (1997) in their study evaluating the effectiveness
of cognitive-behavioural treatment of severe anger associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in Vietnam veterans.
Anger management provision
This usually occurs as a psychoeducational, structured group-based approach that imparts information about anger (its determinants,
signs, manifestations and consequences) and about ways of controlling it, such as changing perceptions or beliefs, using relaxation, and
adopting alternative behaviours for dealing with provocation. Content and format varies, but most existing forms of this intervention
are guided by cognitive-behavioural principles. The term "anger management" was coined in Novaco (1975) to describe an experimental
cognitive-behavioural treatment, but it is now useful to distinguish this level of intervention from more specialised anger treatment. The
group format does provide a forum for the sharing of anger experiences, peer support, and peer modelling, as well as serving the throughput
objectives of a clinical service system.
Compared to "anger treatment," the provision of anger management is more time-limited, is generally homogenous in procedure and,
while there is participant discussion, it is less interactive than treatment and more unidirectional in information flow. It involves less client
disclosure and is thus less threatening; correspondingly because of its structure, the personal investment for the client is lower. Importantly,
it is not predicated on individual case formulation. Evaluative measures are often employed, but explicit use of individual client assessment
data tends not to occur.

Anger treatment provision
At this level of intervention, anger dyscontrol is approached in terms of the client's core needs. However, anger treatment is not a
substitute for psychotherapy and should be understood as an adjunctive treatment. It focuses on the psychological deficits in self-regulation
articulated in individual case formulation, and explicitly integrates assessment with treatment. It often involves clients who are high in
threat-sensing, suspicion, and avoidance and, therefore, hinges on the provision of a therapeutic relationship.
Anger treatment targets enduring change in cognitive, arousal and behavioural systems. It centrally involves substantial cognitive
restructuring and the acquisition of arousal reduction and behavioural coping skills. It achieves cognitive and behaviour change in large
measure through changing valuations of personal priorities and augmenting self-monitoring capacity. Because it addresses anger as
grounded and embedded in aversive and often traumatic life experiences, it entails the evocation of distressed emotions (i.e. fear and
sadness as well as anger). In the stress inoculation CBT approach, therapist-guided exposure to provocation occurs in graduated hierarchy
procedures. As high-anger clients, particularly those with comorbid psychological and personality disorders, tend to push people away as
part of their external blaming and avoidant styles, advanced therapeutic skill and supervision is essential in delivering anger intervention at
this level.
CBT anger treatment: stress inoculation for anger control
Model and rationale
This cognitive-behavioural approach to anger treatment involves the following key components: (1) client education about anger, stress
and aggression; (2) self-monitoring of anger frequency, intensity and situational triggers; (3) construction of a personal anger provocation
hierarchy, created from self-monitoring data and used for the practice and testing of coping skills; (4) arousal reduction techniques of
progressive muscle relaxation, breathing-focused relaxation and guided imagery training; (5) cognitive restructuring by altering attentional

focus, modifying appraisals and using self-instruction; (6) training behavioural coping in communication and respectful assertiveness
as modelled and rehearsed with the therapist; and (7) practising the cognitive, arousal regulatory and behavioural coping skills while
visualising and role-playing progressively more intense anger-arousing scenes from the personal hierarchies.
Self-monitoring
Anger regulation cannot occur in the absence of self-monitoring. One must detect a signal that there is departure from equilibrium and that
deviation must be assigned negative valuation. Persons with serious anger problems have great impairment in self-monitoring capacity,
and boosting that capacity is a central and fundamental therapeutic objective. This is accomplished by concerted notation and feedback
on client-maintained anger incident logs, as well as the psychometric instruments and therapist-distributed handout material for client
education about anger and aggression.
When people report anger experiences, they most typically give accounts of things that have "happened to them." For the most part, they
describe events that are physically and temporally proximate to their anger arousal. As a rule, they provide accounts of provocations ascribed
to events in the immediate situation of the anger experience, portrayed in the telling as being something about which anger is quite fitting.
This can be viewed as a "proximity bias" in the understanding of anger (Novaco, 1993).
The response to the question "What makes you angry?" hinges on self-monitoring proficiencies. People are commonly neither good nor
objective observers when they are angry. Anger is very much a blaming reaction. Far less commonly do people disaggregate their anger
experiences into source components, some of which may originate from distal sources and ambient circumstances (e.g. work overload,
economic strain or family stress) rather than from acute, proximal occurrences. Concerted attention to the client's anger logs by the
therapist provides for the identification of anger triggers, for understanding the contextual surround and for enabling clients to recognise
how their cultivated world view provides the landscape for their anger.

Cognitive restructuring
To illustrate cognitive change efforts, we return to our case example and to the incident when Tim was questioned by a member of staff about
coming back to the ward early. The therapist first would have introduced the concept of thought catching, that is, monitoring of automatic
thoughts occurring at the time of provocation. Clients are asked to record in their anger logs the thoughts that they had at the time of an
incident. These thoughts, and their role in experience and expression of anger, are discussed and explored in treatment sessions. Clients are
encouraged to try to think differently about the situation by, for example, putting themselves in the shoes of the person with whom they
were angry. The following excerpt from a session with Tim illustrates how this process is aimed at disconnecting the threat perception that
drives hostile thinking and aggressive behaviour. Recall that Tim said that he was being picked on; he had done nothing wrong; he was
furious; and then swore and shouted at the staff member. Here, the therapist facilitates cognitive restructuring:
Therapist (T): OK then Tim, let's think about how you might have handled this differently. Let's say you're in exactly the same situation.
You come back to the ward early because a session has finished early. The staff are suspicious about why you have come back when you
shouldn't have. They are asking you why you aren't at your session when you should be. Just the same as what happened to you here. OK?
Tim: Yes.
T: Right. So straight away you start thinking these angry thoughts. Like "I've done nothing wrong. They're picking on me. It's not fair."
That sort of thing.
Tim: Right.
T: But instead of thinking those thoughts, which make you angry straight away, can you think of any other reasons why staff might have
behaved like they did?
Tim: Umm.
T: Well, try to put yourself in their shoes - see the situation from their point of view.


Tim: Er, OK.
T: If you were a member of staff and a patient turns up on the ward when they should be in a session, what are you going to be thinking?
Tim: Yeah right - well for one thing I'd be saying to myself, "This guy's maybe trying it on - he shouldn't be leaving sessions early."
T: OK, well that sounds possible. Can you think of other any other reasons why staff might be concerned?
Tim: Well it's their job to be worried about where patients are, isn't it? It's to do with security. You can't have patients just coming and going
at all times.
T: So if you are thinking like that, how are you feeling in this situation?
Tim: I'd be less angry - say five out of ten.
T: And what about your body?
Tim: Oh, I think it wouldn't be as tensed up. Less shaky. Maybe two out of ten.
T: Do you think you would have behaved in a different way?
Tim: I think so.
T: How?
Tim: Maybe I wouldn't have flew off the handle. I'd have tried to explain to the staff what happened with the class finishing early. Calm like.
(During this dialogue the therapist has been using a worksheet with graphics to record two lines: what actually happened (actual), and
then what could have happened (possible).)
T: So if you look at what actually happened, and then look at what might have happened, you had exactly the same situation to begin with,
but very different endings. What do you think made the difference?
Tim: Well maybe thinking about it in a different way helped. Not thinking straight off that they were trying to get me.
Once introduced, cognitive restructuring work is a component part of each session. Between sessions, clients record provocation incidents
in their anger logs, and are encouraged to try "thinking differently" about these experiences so as to move the cognitive reframing

temporally closer to actual incidents. A central goal of the cognitive change effort is to modify the entrenched anger schemas that produce
anger reactions with considerable automaticity. For high-anger people, anger is often a default response to aversive events, intrinsically
linked to threat-sensing. For example, seeing the person with whom one is enamoured conversing with a potential suitor, no matter how
remote the prospect, can elicit a strong anger reaction in conjunction with a "betrayal" appraisal. Having to wait for staff attention in some
service sector (e.g. a social service agency, clinic or retail store) can provoke anger that follows from appraisals of being "ignored" or "deemed
worthless," which may be coupled with a entitlement schema. Cognitive restructuring seeks to alter the fixed frameworks that operate as
the lens through which such social encounters are viewed and experienced. Because those appraisal systems have been shaped by self-
protective motives, the therapist must provide a context of safety and support in order for alternative appraisal and expectation structures
to be established.
Arousal reduction
There is no more central metaphor for anger than hot fluid in a container. Physiological activation is a defining feature of anger (Novaco,
1994). The cardiovascular, respiratory and skeletal systems are key components (Robins & Novaco, 2000; Siegman & Smith, 1994), and
neural structures and transmitting mechanisms are progressively being identified for their activating and modulating functions (e.g.
Anderson & Silver, 1998; Davidson et al., 2000; Harmon-Jones & Sigelman, 2001; Potegal et al., 2010). Field and laboratory studies in
abundance have provided ample evidence of the negative health consequences of "hot" anger reactivity (Williams & Williams, 1993),
and suppressed anger has well-established links to elevated physiological arousal and sustained hypertension (Robins & Novaco, 2000).
Importantly, residual arousal from anger events can transfer to future conflicts and further intensify the anger reactivity to instigating
events (Zillmann, 1988; Zillmann & Bryant, 1974). The somatic arousal component should perhaps be the primary treatment target in anger
treatment for persons affected by trauma, as it has been found to be strongly linked to non-anger PTSD symptoms and independent PTSD
diagnosis (Novaco & Chemtob, 2002).


Arousal reduction procedures begin with helping the person to identify signs of arousal, including its intensity, duration and lability,
as well as latency in reactivity. As discussed earlier, intensity is a gateway parameter, as modifying intensity can provide a foothold for
treatment. Fundamental to arousal reduction is the regulation of breathing, which is the central rhythm of the body. Slow, deep breathing
is therefore demonstrated and induced in each session, and clients are encouraged to practise on their own. Progressive muscle relaxation,
akin to the classic Jacobsen (1939) procedures of systematically tensing and relaxing sequences of muscle groups, is taught to clients
as a core relaxation induction procedure. (Progressive muscle relaxation exercises are set out in Table 3.5 in Chapter 3.) Other classic
methods, such as autogenic procedures (Schultz & Lutne, 1959), emphasising images of heaviness and warmth, are good supplements or
substitutes for physically impaired patients (e.g. spinal cord injury patients) or for someone who is averse to muscle tensing. For example,
some clients are reluctant to tense face muscles, because this causes them embarrassment. Guided relaxation imagery is also used, vividly
portraying tranquil scenes to the client to induce a light somnambulistic state. (Guided relaxation imagery exercises are set out in Table 3.5
in Chapter 3.) Supplementary resources are marshalled when possible within institutions (e.g. music, art, horticulture) to bolster arousal
reduction efforts, and clients in any context are encouraged to engage in personally chosen practices having arousal reduction aims, such as
mindfulness meditation, yoga, tai chi, aerobics, or aesthetic appreciation. (Mindfulness body scan and mindfulness of breathing exercises
are given in Boxes 9.4 and 9.5 in Chapter 9.)
Behavioural coping skills
Behavioural responses play an important role in shaping and defining anger. Implicit in the cognitive labelling of anger is an inclination
to act in an antagonistic or confrontative manner. Such action impulses have a role in defining the emotional state as anger, as opposed to
some other emotion. As anger is often the product of behavioural exchanges that escalate aversive events, the development of anger schemas
and scripts for anger episodes are rooted in encodings of behavioural routines. Huesmann's (1998) social information processing model is
particularly valuable for understanding these constructs and the reciprocities between cognitive and behavioural systems.


Proficient self-monitoring can prompt negative feedback to counter the escalation of anger and aggression, breaking the self-fulfilling
prophecy chain whereby angry, antagonistic outputs elicit antagonism in reply, which then confirms the belief that others are malevolent.
Behavioural coping skills are essential for anger management and are part of all such CBT programmes. Goldstein and Keller (1987), for
example, offered valuable procedures for training prosocial skills, communication, negotiation and contracting. Feindler and Ecton's (1986)
work with adolescents is also rich with verbal and non-verbal coping skills.
For dealing with anger evoking interpersonal situations, three main categories of behavioural skills should be inculcated: (1) diplomacy,
whereby the person can effectively convey a conflict-neutralising sentiment, offer a modicum of empathy, and seek a mutually satisfying
solution; (2) strategic withdrawal, removal of oneself from a high-conflict situation when resolution is not currently feasible, followed by
cool-down techniques, and later constructive re-engagement; and (3) respectful assertiveness, maintaining poise and control with a repertoire
of verbal skills and courteous firmness. Therapist-directed role-play is the principal mode in both individual and group treatment for
teaching behavioural skills, but visual-motor imaginative rehearsal (as would be used with sports competitors) is always a useful technique.
In the stress inoculation approach to CBT anger treatment (e.g. Chemtob et al., 1997; Novaco, 1977), provocation hierarchy work is a central
platform by which behavioural skills rehearsed with the therapist are then applied and tested.
Provocation hierarchy work
Provocation is simulated in the therapeutic context by imaginal and role-play exposure to anger incidents anchored in the client's life
experiences, as directed by the therapist. The provocation incidents are graduated in anger intensity and are arranged as a hierarchy, which
is produced collaboratively. This graduated, hierarchical exposure, done in conjunction with the teaching of coping skills across sessions, is
the basis for the "inoculation" metaphor (Meichenbaum, 1985). The therapist helps the client to arrange a gradation of personally provoking
situations, constructing scenes providing sufficient detail to generate a good imaginal image. The scenarios are described in matter-of-fact
terms but incorporate wording that captures the client's perceptual sensitivities on provoking elements, such as the antagonist's tone of

voice or nuances of facial expression. Each scenario ends with provocative aspects of the situation, not denoting the client's reaction, so that
it serves as a stimulus scene (Taylor et al., 2005). For example:
You are sitting in the day room, watching your favourite television programme. You are really enjoying it. Another person comes in, and
without asking, walks up to the TV, switches to another channel, and then sits down to watch a different programme.
In constructing hierarchy items, the therapist should identify moderating variables that will exacerbate or buffer the magnitude of the
anger reaction, should the scene need to be intensified or attenuated. Prior to the presentation of a scene, whether in imaginal or role-
play mode, anger control coping is rehearsed and arousal reduction is induced through deep breathing and muscle relaxation. Imaginal
presentation should occur before role-play is attempted. For each scenario, after about 30 seconds of vividly imagining the situation, the
therapists ask the client to raise a finger if he or she experiences anger. The therapist notes the latency and firmness of the finger-raising
as information about degree of anger experienced and scene appropriateness for its hierarchy position. Details about the procedure for
individual treatment are given in a therapist manual (Novaco, 2001) and are elaborated further in Taylor and Novaco (2005).
Summary
Anger is a normal human emotion that in many circumstances is adaptive and helpful. However, anger may also cause problems when it is
dysregulated, that is when it is activated too frequently or expressed too intensely without appropriate controls. In addition, the designation
of anger as a "problem" depends on the sociocultural context in which it is viewed. Problematic anger is a feature of many mental health
problems, leading to adverse consequences for the client and others. While anger management has been offered to people presenting with a
range of problems, most of the research to date has been conducted on college-student samples. Meta-analysis shows that anger treatments
have medium to strong effect sizes, with about 75% of those in receipt of treatment improving compared to controls. Anger affects a client

behaviourally, interpersonally and physiologically, all of which need to be understood at assessment and formulation, and addressed in
treatment planning.
Comprehensive assessment of anger problems includes gathering information on the frequency of anger, the degree of anger, how long it
lasts and the behaviours associated with anger. Very often a preparatory phase or "trial period" of therapy is offered to clients before
embarking on anger treatment, to increase motivation for treatment and to establish basic skills of emotion identification, self-monitoring,
communication about anger experiences and arousal reduction. This trial period serves to build trust in the therapist and the treatment
programme, and provides an atmosphere conducive to personal disclosure and the collaboration required by this therapeutic approach. In
making a formulation, the therapist brings together information from the preparatory phase of treatment; clinical interview with the client,
significant others, and clinical team or case workers; self-report psychometric scales and anger diary recordings; behavioural observation
ratings; review and coding of case files and incident reports; and structured provocation testing. Formulation occurs in collaboration with
the client over a number of sessions, using an external events × internal processes × behavioural responses analysis of anger. Treatments for
anger control problems include general clinical care for anger, where anger is addressed as an issue as part of a mental health treatment plan;
anger management, where information is provided, usually in a structured group format, about anger and ways of controlling it, usually
within a cognitive-behavioural model; and anger treatment, which aims to produce enduring changes in cognitive, arousal and behavioural
systems. Anger treatment occurs within the context of an individualised formulation and a therapeutic relationship. Key components of
anger treatment include (1) client education about anger, stress and aggression; (2) self-monitoring of anger frequency, intensity and
situational triggers; (3) construction of a personal anger provocation hierarchy, created from the self-monitoring data and used for the
practice and testing of coping skills; (4) arousal reduction techniques of progressive muscle relaxation, breathing-focused relaxation and
guided imagery training; (5) cognitive restructuring by altering attentional focus, modifying appraisals and using self-instruction; (6)
training behavioural coping in communication and respectful assertiveness as modelled and rehearsed with the therapist; and (7) practising

the cognitive, arousal regulatory, and behavioural coping skills while visualising and role-playing progressively more intense anger-arousing
scenes from the personal hierarchies.

Exercises
Using the case of Tim from the chapter, assign the roles of therapist, Tim and an observer. Role-play the following scenarios, changing roles
after each.

1. Part of a preparatory session with Tim in which you work with him on one of the following skills: emotion identification, self-
monitoring, communication about anger experiences or arousal reduction.
2. Part of a session in which you collaboratively formulate with him about his anger control problems using the external events × internal
processes × behavioural responses analysis of anger problems.
3. Part of a therapy session with Tim in which you either construct with him a personal anger provocation hierarchy from his self-
monitoring data or work on teaching and practising arousal reduction techniques of progressive muscle relaxation, breathing-focused
relaxation, or guided imagery training.
4. Part of a therapy session with Tim in which you work with him on cognitive restructuring, either by altering attentional focus,
modifying appraisals or using self-instruction.

Evidence summary
DiGiuseppe, R., & Tafrate, R. C. (2007). Understanding Anger Disorders. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fernandez, E. (2013). Treatments for Anger in Specific Populations. New York: Oxford University Press.

Further reading for practitioners
Link, S. (1997). Assessment and Management of Patients Presenting Risk to Others. Leicester: British Psychological Society Core Miniguide
Series.
Novaco, R. (1975). Anger Control: The Development and Evaluation of and Experimental Treatment. Lexington, MA: Heath.
Novaco, R., & Jarvis, K. (2002). Brief cognitive behavioural intervention for anger. In F. Bond & W. Dryden (Eds.), Handbook of Brief
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (pp. 77-100). Chichester: Wiley.
Tafrate, R. C., & Mitchell, D. (2014). Forensic CBT: A Handbook for practitioners. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Taylor, J. L., & Novaco, R. W. (2005). Anger Treatment for People with Developmental Disabilities. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Assessment instruments
Buss, A. H., & Perry, M. (1992). The Aggression Questionnaire. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 452-459.
Nijman, H.L.I., Muris, P., Merckelbach, H.L.G.J., Palmstierna, T., Wistedt, B., Vos, A. M., ... Allertz, W. (1999). The Staff Observation Scale—
Revised (SOAS-R). Aggressive Behaviour, 25, 197-209.
Novaco, R. (2003). The Novaco Anger Scale and Provocation Inventory (NAS-PI). Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services.
Spielberger, C. (1988). Manual for the State Trait Anger Expression Inventory. Tampa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.


Further reading for clients

Bilodeau, L. (1992). The Anger Workbook. Minneapolis, MN: Compcare.
Potter-Efron, R., & Potter-Efron, R. (1995). The Ten Most Common Anger Styles and What to Do About Them. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Tafrate, R. C., & Kassinove, H. (2009). Anger Management for Everyone. Atascadero, CA: Impact Publishers.
Tavris, C. (1989). Anger: The Misunderstood Emotion (revised and updated). New York: Touchstone.

References

Anderson, K., & Silver, J. M. (1998). Modulation of anger and aggression. Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry, 3, 232-241.
Andrews, B., Brewin, C. R., Rose, S., & Kirk, M. (2000). Predicting PTSD symptoms in victims of violent crime: The role of shame, anger,
and childhood abuse. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 69-73.
Attwood, T., & Joachim, R. (1994). The prevention and management of seriously disruptive behaviour in Australia. In N. Bouras (Ed.),
Mental Health in Mental Retardation: Recent Advances and Practices (pp. 365-374). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Averill, J. R. (1982). Anger and Aggression: An Essay on Emotion. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Beck, A. T. (1999). Prisoners of Hate: The Cognitive Basis of Anger, Hostility, and Violence. New York: Harper Collins.
Beck, R., & Fernandez, E. (1998). Cognitive-behavioural therapy in the treatment of anger: A meta-analysis. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 22, 63-74.
Benazzi, F., & Akiskal, H. (2005). Irritable-hostile depression: Further validation as a bipolar depressive mixed stated. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 84, 197-207.


Bensley, L., Nelson, N., Kaufman, J., Silverstein, B., . (1995). Patient and staff views of factors influencing assaults on psychiatric hospital
employees. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 16, 433-446.
Buss, A. H., & Perry, M. (1992). The Aggression Questionnaire. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 452-459.
Carmel, H., & Hunter, M. (1989). Staff injuries from inpatient violence. Hospital & Community Psychiatry, 40, 41-46.
Chemtob, C. M., Novaco, R. W., Hamada, R. S., & Gross, D. M. (1997). Cognitive-behavioural treatment for severe anger in post-traumatic
stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 184-189.
Chesney, M., & Rosenman, R. (1985). Anger and Hostility in Behavioural and Cardiovascular Disorders. New York: Hemisphere.
Cheung, P., Schweitzer, I., Tuckwell, V., & Crowley, K. C. (1996). A prospective study of aggression among psychiatric patients in
rehabilitation wards. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 30, 257-262.
Craig, T. J. (1982). An epidemiological study of problems associated with violence among psychiatric inpatients. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 139, 1262-1266.
Davidson, K., Putnam, K. M., & Larsen, C. L. (2000). Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotion regulation-A possible prelude to
violence. Science, 289, 591-594.
Deffenbacher, J. L., Story, D. A., Stark, R. S., Hogg, J. A., & Brandon, A. D. (1987). Cognitive-relaxation and social skills interventions in the
treatment of general anger. Journal of Counselling Psychology, 34, 171-176.
Del Vecchio, T., & K. D. O'Leary (2004). Effectiveness of anger treatments for specific anger problems: A meta-analytic review. Clinical
Psychology Review, 24, 15-34.
DiGiuseppe, R., & Tafrate, R. C. (2003). Anger treatments for adults: A meta-analytic review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 10,
70-84.
DiGiuseppe, R., & Tafrate, R. C. (2007). Understanding Anger Disorders. New York: Oxford University Press.


Doyle, M., Carter, S., Shaw, J., & Dolan, M. (2012). Predicting community violence from patients discharged from acute mental health
units in England. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 47, 627-637.
Doyle, M., & Dolan, M. (2006). Evaluating the validity of anger regulation problems, interpersonal style, and disturbed mental state for
predicting inpatient violence. Behavioural Sciences and the Law, 24, 783-798.
Eckhardt, C. I., & Deffenbacher, J. L. (1995). Diagnosis of anger disorders. In H. Kassinove (Ed.), Anger Disorders: Definition, Diagnosis, and
Treatment (pp. 27-48). Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis.
Eckhardt, C., Norlander, B., & Deffenbacher, J. (2004). The assessment of anger and hostility: A critical review. Aggression and Violent
Behavior, 9, 17-43.
Edmonson, C. B., & Conger, J. C. (1996). A review of treatment efficacy for individuals with anger problems: Conceptual, assessment, and
methodological issues. Clinical Psychology Review, 16, 251-275.
Ehlers, A., Mayou, R. A., & Bryant, B. (1998). Psychological predictors of chronic posttraumatic stress disorder after motor vehicle
accidents. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107, 508-519.
Fava, M., & Rosenbaum, J. (1999). Anger attacks in patients with depression. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60, 21-24.
Feeny, N. C., Zoellner, L. A., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Anger dissociation, and posttraumatic stress disorder among female assault victims.
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 13, 89-100.
Feindler, E. L., & Ecton, R. B. (1986). Adolescent Anger Control: Cognitive Therapy Techniques. New York: Pergamon Press.
Feindler, E. L., Ecton, R. B., Kingsley, R. B., & Dubey, D. R. (1986). Group anger-control training for institutionalized psychiatric male
adolescents. Behaviour Therapy, 17, 109-123.
Frost, W. D., & Averill, J. R. (1982). Differences between men and women in the everyday experience of anger. In J. Averill (Ed.), Anger and
Aggression: An Essay on Emotion (pp. 281-316). New York: Springer-Verlag.


Gansle, K. A. (2005). The effectiveness of school-based anger interventions and programs: A meta-analysis. Journal of School Psychology,
43, 321-341.
Goldstein, A. P., & Keller, H. (1987). Aggressive Behaviour: Assessment and Intervention. New York: Pergamon Press.
Grisso, T., Davis, J., Vesselinov, R., Appelbaum, P. S., & Monahan, J. (2000). Violent thoughts and violent behaviour following
hospitalization for mental disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 388-398.
Hall, G. S. (1899). A study of anger. American Journal of Psychology, 10, 516-591.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Sigelman, J. (2001). State anger and prefrontal brain activity: Evidence that insult-related relative left-prefrontal
activation is associated with experienced anger and aggression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 797-803.
Hazaleus, S. L., & Deffenbacher, J. L. (1986). Relaxation and cognitive treatments of anger. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
54, 222-226.
Heseltine, K., Howells, K., & Day, A. (2010). Brief anger interventions with offenders may be ineffective: A replication and extension.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 246-250.
Ho, B.P.V., Carter, M., & Stephenson, J. (2010). Anger management using a cognitive-behavioural approach for children with special
education needs: A literature review and meta-analysis. International Journal of Disability, Development and Education, 57, 245-265.
Howells, K. (1989). Anger management methods in relation to the prevention of violent behaviour. In J. Archer & K. Browne (Eds.),
Human Aggression: Naturalistic Accounts (pp. 153–181). London: Routledge.
Howells, K., & Day, A. (2003). Readiness for anger management: clinical and theoretical issues. Clinical Psychology Review, 23, 319-337.
Huesmann, L. R. (1998). The role of social information processing and cognitive schema in the acquisition and maintenance of habitual
aggressive behaviour. In R. G. Geen & E. Donnerstein (Eds.), Human Aggression: Theories, Research, and Implications for Social Policy (pp.
73-109). San Diego: Academic Press.
Jacobsen, E. (1939). Progressive Relaxation. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


Johnson, E. H. (1990). The Deadly Emotions: The Role of Anger, Hostility, and Aggression in Health and Emotional Well-being. New York:
Praeger.
Kassinove, H., Sukhodolsky, D. G., Tsytsarev, S. V., & Solovyova, S. (1997). Self-reported anger episodes in Russia and America. Journal of
Social Behaviour and Personality, 12, 301-324.
Kennedy, H. G., Kemp, L. I., & Dyer, D. E. (1992). Fear and anger in delusion (paranoid) disorder: The association with violence. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 488-492.
Kiely, J., & Pankhurst, H. (1998). Violence faced by staff in a learning disability service. Disability and Rehabilitation, 20, 81-89.
Kopper, B. A., & Epperson, D. I. (1996). The experience and expression of anger: Relationships with gender, gender role socialization,
depression, and mental health functioning. Journal of Counselling Psychology, 43, 158-165.
Lindsay, W. R., Allan, R., Macleod, F., Smart, N., & Smith, A.H.W. (2003). Long-term treatment and management of violent tendencies of
men with intellectual disabilities convicted of assault. Mental Retardation, 41, 47-56.
Lindsay, W. R., Allan, R., Parry, C., Macleod, F., Cottrell, J., Overend, H., & Smith, A. H. (2004). Anger and aggression in people
with intellectual disabilities: Treatment and follow-up of consecutive referrals and a waiting list comparison. Clinical Psychology and
Psychotherapy, 11, 255-264.
McHugh, T., Forbes, D., Bates, G., Hopwood, M., & Creamer, M. (2012). Anger in PTSD: Is there a need for a concept of PTSD-related
posttraumatic anger? Clinical Psychology Review, 32, 93-104.
McNeil, D. E., Eisner, J. P., & Binder, R. L. (2003). The relationship between aggressive attributional style and violence by psychiatric
patients. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 399-403.
Meichenbaum, D. (1985). Stress Inoculation Training. New York: Pergamon Press.
Miller, R-J., & Andrews, B. (2005). Suicidal and other self-harming behaviour in offender women: The role of shame, anger, and childhood
abuse. Legal and Criminological Psychology, 10, 13-25.


Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (1991). Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People to Change Addictive Behaviour. New York: Guilford Press.
Monahan, J., Steadman, H. J., Silver, E., Appelbaum, P. S., Robbins, P. C., Mulvey, E. P., (2001). Rethinking Risk Assessment: The MacArthur
Study of Mental Disorder and Violence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
National Audit Office (2003). A Safer Place to Work: Protecting NHS Hospital and Ambulance Staff from Violence and Aggression. Report by
the Comptroller and Auditor General (HC 527), London.
Nijman, H.L.I., Muris, P., Merckelbach, H.L.G.J., Palmstierna, T., Wistedt, B., Vos, A. M., ... Allertz, W. (1999). The Staff Observation Scale—
Revised (SOAS-R). Aggressive Behaviour, 25, 197-209.
Novaco, R. W. (1975). Anger Control: The Development and Evaluation of an Experimental Treatment. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath.
Novaco, R. W. (1977). Stress inoculation: A cognitive therapy for anger and its application to a case of depression. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 45, 600-608.
Novaco, R. W. (1993). Clinicians ought to view anger contextually. Behaviour Change, 10, 208-218.
Novaco, R. W. (1994). Anger as a risk factor for violence among the mentally disordered. In J. Monahan & H. Steadman (Eds.), Violence
and Mental Disorder: Developments in Risk Assessment (pp. 21-59) Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Novaco, R. W. (1997). Remediating anger and aggression with violent offenders. Legal and Criminological Psychology, 2, 77-88.
Novaco, R. W. (2001). Stress Inoculation Treatment for Anger Control: Therapist Procedures (Revised). Unpublished treatment manual.
Novaco, R. W. (2003). The Novaco Anger Scale and Provocation Inventory (NAS-PI). Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services.
Novaco, R. W. (2010). Anger and psychopathology. In M. Potegal, G. Stemmler, & C. Spielberger (Eds.), Handbook of Anger (pp. 465-497).
New York: Springer.
Novaco, R. W. (2011). Anger dysregulation: Driver of violent offending. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry and Psychology, 22, 650-668.
Novaco, R. W. (2013). Reducing anger-related offending: What works. In L. A. Craig, L. Dixon, & T. A. Ganon (Eds.), What Works in
Offender Rehabilitation: An Evidence-Based Approach to Assessment and Treatment (pp. 211-236). Chichester: Wiley.


Novaco, R. W., & Chemtob, C. M. (2002). Anger and combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 15, 123-
132.
Novaco, R. W., & Jarvis, K. L. (2002). Brief cognitive behavioural intervention for anger. In F. Bond & W. Dryden (Eds.), Handbook of Brief
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (pp. 77-100). Chichester: Wiley.
Novaco, R. W., Ramm, M., & Black, L. (2000). Anger treatment with offenders. In C. Hollin (Ed.), Handbook of Offender Assessment and
Treatment. London: John Wiley.
Novaco, R. W., & Renwick, S. J. (2003). Anger Predictors and the Validation of a Ward Behaviour Scale for Anger and Aggression. Unpublished
manuscript.
Novaco, R. W., & Taylor, J. L. (2004). Assessment of anger and aggression in male offenders with developmental disabilities. Psychological
Assessment, 16, 42-50.
Novaco, R. W., & Taylor, J. L. (2015). Reduction of assaultive behaviour following anger treatment of forensic hospital patients with
intellectual disabilities. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 65, 52-59.
Novaco, R. W., & Whittington, R. (2013). Anger regulation for psychotic patients. In E. Fernandez (Ed.), Treatments for Anger in Specific
Populations: Theory, Application, and Outcome (pp. 114-137). New York: Oxford University Press.
Potegal, M., Stemmler, G., & Spielberger, C. (Eds.) (2010). International Handbook of Anger. Constituent and Concomitant Biological,
Psychological and Social Processes. New York: Springer.
Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1983). Stages and processes of self-change of smoking: Toward an integrative model of change.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51, 390-395.
Rasmussen, C. A., Hogh, A., & Andersen, L. P. (2013). Threats and physical violence in the workplace: A comparative study of four areas
of human service work. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 28, 2749-2769.


Renwick, S., Black, L., Ramm, M., & Novaco, R. W. (1997). Anger treatment with forensic hospital patients. Legal and Criminological
Psychology, 2, 103-116.
Robins, S., & Novaco, R. W. (2000). Anger control as a health promotion mechanism. In D. I. Mostofsky & D. H. Barlow (Eds.), The
Management of Anxiety in Medical Disorders (pp. 361-377). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Saini, M. (2009). A meta-analysis of the psychological treatment of anger: Developing guidelines for evidence-based practice. Journal of
the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 34, 473-488.
Santanello, A. P. (2011). A composite case study of an individual with anger as a presenting problem. Cognitive and Behavioural Practice,
18, 209-211.
Schultz, J., & Lutne, W. (1959). Autogenic training. New York: Grune & Stratton.
Shea, M. T., Lambert, J., & Reddy, M. K. (2013). A randomized pilot study of anger treatment for Iraq and Afghanistan veterans. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 51, 607-613.
Siegman, A. W., & Smith, T. W. (1994). Anger, Hostility, and the Heart. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Spielberger, C. D. (1996). State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory Professional Manual. Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.
Sukhodolsky, D. G., Golub, A., & Cromwell, E. N. (2001). Development and validation of the anger rumination scale. Personality and
Individual Differences, 31, 689-700.
Sukhodolsky, D. G., Kassinove, H., & Gorman, B. S. (2004). Cognitive-behaviour therapy for anger in children and adolescents: A meta-
analysis. Aggression and Violent Behaviour, 9, 247-269.
Swogger, M. T., Walsh, Z., Homaifar, B. Y., Caine, E. D., & Conner, K. R. (2012). Predicting self- and other-directed violence among
discharged psychiatric patients: the roles of anger and psychopathic traits. Psychological Medicine, 42, 371-379.
Tafrate, R. C. (1995). Evaluation of treatment strategies for adult anger disorders. In H. Kassinove (Ed.), Anger Disorders: Definition,
Diagnosis, and Treatment (pp. 109–129). Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.


Tangney, J. P., Wagner, P. E., Hill-Barlow, D., Marschall, D. E., & Gramzow, R. (1996). Relation of shame and guilt to constructive versus
destructive responses to anger across the lifespan. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 797-809.
Taylor, J. L., & Novaco, R. W. (2005). Anger Treatment for People with Developmental Disabilities: A Theory, Evidence, and Manual Based
Approach. Chichester: Wiley & Sons.
Taylor, J. L., & Novaco, R. W. (2013). Anger control problems. In J. L. Taylor, W. R. Lindsay, R. P. Hennings, & C. Hatton (Eds.), Psychological
Therapies for Adults with Intellectual Disabilities (pp. 133-155). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Taylor, J. L., Novaco, R. W., Gillmer, B., Robertson, A., & Thorne, I. (2005). A controlled trial of individual cognitive-behavioural anger
treatment for people with intellectual disabilities and histories of aggression. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 44, 368-382.
Taylor, J. L., Novaco, R. W., Gillmer, B., & Thorne, I. (2002). Cognitive-behavioural treatment of anger intensity in offenders with
intellectual disabilities. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 15, 151-165.
Taylor, J. L., Novaco, R. W., Guinan, C., & Street, N. (2004). Development of an imaginal provocation test to evaluate treatment for anger
problems in people with intellectual disabilities. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 11, 233-246.
Thomaes, S., Stegge, H., Olthof, T., Bushman, B. J., & Nezlak, J. B. (2011). Turning shame inside-out: "Humiliated fury" in young
adolescents. Emotion, 11, 786-793.
Ullrich, S., Keers, R., & Coid, J. W. (2013). Delusions, anger, and serious violence: New findings from the MacArthur violence risk
assessment study. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 40, 1174-1181.
Wang, E. W., & Diamond, P. M. (1999). Empirically identifying factors related to violence risk in corrections. Behavioural Sciences and the
Law, 17, 377-389.
Watt, B. D., & Howells, K. (1999). Skills training for aggression control: Evaluation of an anger management programme for violent
offenders. Legal and Criminological Psychology, 4, 285-300.
Williams, R., & Williams, V. (1993). Anger Kills. New York: Harper Perennial.


Willner, P., Rose, J., Jahoda, A., Kroese, B. S., Felce, D., Cohen, D., ... Hood, K. (2013). Group-based cognitive-behavioural anger
management for people with mild to moderate intellectual disabilities: cluster randomized controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry,
203, 288-296.
Zillmann, D. (1988). Cognition-excitation interdependencies in aggressive behaviour. Aggressive Behaviour, 14, 51-64.
Zillmann, D., & Bryant, J. (1974). Effect of residual excitation on the emotional response to provocation and delayed aggressive
behaviour. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 782-791.


Section 3 Anxiety disorders

Chapter 13 Social anxiety disorder
Odhran McCarthy and Tony Bates
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-13
Case study
It was my first day of college. The anticipation of a new environment, new faces and new challenges all lay ahead of me throughout the
year. However, I am more concerned about just getting through the first day. My first lecture commences at 10am, but I'm late. I sit in the
bathroom, with the toilet door firmly closed, hands shaking, my feet tapping the floor. Racing thoughts are scrambled, with no substance or
meaning. My heart thumping; feeling like it's going to explode within my chest. My new shirt I purchased for my first day of college is now
covered in sweat. The adrenaline from the anxiety has kicked in. I try to talk myself out of it, "Cop on David, get a grip of yourself. Why can't
I be like everyone else?!" I look down at my phone, it's now 10:20 a.m., and I reluctantly open the toilet door and make my way to class. I peek
through the glass of the lecture hall, freeze, and think to myself, "there must be hundreds of people in this lecture." I open the door, and sneak
in, like a ninja, and quietly take one of the aisle seats close to the door, just in case I need to make a quick exit. I sit there quietly, with a blank


expression, looking around the class, feeling inadequate, like I shouldn't be there. Now, at the age of 27, these thoughts and symptoms are a
daily routine for me. In fact, it would feel unusual if they didn't happen.
Growing up, I would have been considered by many, including my parents, as the "shy," "quiet" and "quirky" kid, not having many friends,
or doing typical activities a teenager would normally get up to. I never had any confidence in myself, or felt of any value to anyone. A kid
that's angry and sad, not "shy" and "quirky." For me, I believe my anxiety stemmed from my childhood and teenage years, and now into
adulthood. I remember being constantly under attack, with verbal and physical thrashings by my parents, and always being criticised and
bullied. Looking back now, I can remember it so vividly.
In my late teens and early twenties I spent a lot of time in my bedroom, suicidal, locked away from the madness that was going on outside
it. When I tried to confront my parents about my anxiety, they would typically just say, "There's nothing wrong with you, you just need a kick
up the arse." But they didn't have to deal with the daily torture living with such an illness. Social activities that I used to enjoy, such as playing
snooker, were too much of a struggle. When my one and only dependable friend did ask me out for a few drinks, it was overwhelming. I
would sit there for the night with the same blank expression as I would in college, with very little interaction, thinking are these people
judging me, feeling inferior, and I would just leave. Eventually, that one dependable friend gave up trying. I never did regain his friendship.
Like most of my friendships and relationships, they never last.
At 24, I was fed up with my life, and had enough, so I decided to take action. I attended a social anxiety programme. At first I was
apprehensive about going at all, but I'm glad I did. It gave me a new lease on life. I now have the confidence to go and do the social activities
that I didn't think I could ever do again. My quality of life has dramatically increased. I find I am not hiding away from social gatherings or
activities. In fact, I am now the person to suggest them, and I have made some friends along the way too. (Anonymous member of social
anxiety group)

Clinical features
The concept of social fears can be traced back as far as 400 b.c. Hippocrates is reported to have described the overly shy person as someone
who "thinks everyman observes him." However, social anxiety disorder (SAD) is about more than just shyness. The term "social phobia"
was coined by Pierre Janet in 1903 who considered it a form of simple phobia. It was not until the 1960s that Isaac Marks (1969) proposed
that social phobia be considered a distinct category separate from other simple phobias. However, with the publication of DSM-III in 1980
the separate diagnoses of social phobia and avoidant personality disorder finally appeared (APA, 1980). Prior to this, in the first and second
editions of the DSM (APA, 1952, 1968), social fears were categorised with other anxiety disorders. They were viewed as projections of
underlying conflicts onto social situations reflecting the prominence of psychodynamic thinking at the time (Alden & Crozier, 2001).
In DSM-III social phobia was narrowly defined, with just four social situations acknowledged: "speaking or performing in public, using
public lavatories, eating in public, and writing in the presence of others" (APA, 1980, p. 324). In contrast, a diagnosis of avoidant personality
disorder was made when there was evidence of a pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy and hypersensitivity to
negative evaluation. The diagnosis of social phobia was made only if avoidant personality disorder could be excluded. Strongly influenced by
the work of Theodore Millon's biosocial learning theory (1969, 1981), avoidant personality disorder described a behaviour pattern resulting
from an anxious child being subjected to persistent experiences of depreciation, which in turn resulted in an active-detached coping style.
Following the publication of DSM-III, research and clinical experience failed to support a definition of social phobia as an anxiety
disorder with clearly circumscribed phobic reactions to discrete social situations. The majority of individuals seeking help for social anxiety
described more pervasive difficulties and yet did not necessarily meet the criteria for the more disabling diagnosis of avoidant personality
disorder. There was a strong clinical overlap, which made clear differentiation difficult. DSM-III criteria were therefore amended in DSM-III-
R, and a new subtype of social phobia (generalised social phobia) was added to the category, which was applied to individuals for whom "the

phobic situation includes most social situations" (APA, 1987, p. 243). With this revision, avoidant personality was dropped as an exclusion
criterion and could now exist as a comorbid diagnosis. Since this generalised subtype of social phobia was described as having a chronic
course with onset in late childhood or early adolescence, the distinction between it and avoidant personality disorder became increasingly
blurred.
Rather than clarify the distinction between these two disorders, the publication of DSM-IV (APA, 1994, 2000), further revised the criteria
for generalised social anxiety in a manner that suggested even greater overlap with avoidant personality disorder. For example, the DSM-III-
R diagnostic criterion "is reticent in social situations because of a fear of saying something inappropriate or foolish, or of being unable to
answer a question" (APA, 1987, p. 353) was replaced by "is inhibited in new interpersonal situations because of feelings of inadequacy" (АРА,
1994, p. 665). Greater emphasis was given in DSM-IV to underlying and enduring personality factors that contributed to social anxiety, for
example, the persistent negative image of self as "socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others" (APA, 1994, p. 665) that led to
"frequently lifelong" (APA, 1994, p. 414) social phobia. To reflect this revised conception of social phobia as an enduring pervasive difficulty,
rather than an irrational fear of some specific activity or situation, the preferred term "social anxiety disorder" (SAD) was introduced (AРА,
1994, p. 411).
The diagnostic criteria for SAD has been revised yet again with the publication of DSM-5 (APA, 2013). According to DSM-5, SAD is
characterised by "a marked fear or anxiety about one or more social situations in which the individual is exposed to possible scrutiny by
others" (APA, 2013, p. 202). Individuals with social anxiety are essentially overly concerned that they will act in a socially inept way or
exhibit inappropriate symptoms of anxiety that will result in negative evaluation which may then result in rejection or be experienced as
offensive by others (APA, 2013, p. 202). Feared situations included being observed (e.g. writing or eating), formal social situations (e.g. public
speaking) and informal social interactions (e.g. small talk with acquaintances). These social situations are typically avoided where possible
or endured with significant distress. While all people may find these kinds of social encounters difficult from time to time, a diagnosis of
SAD is given when these fears significantly and consistently hinder a person's social or occupational functioning. This is quite different from


adaptive social anxiety, which itself has an important function of alerting people to signs of social threat (Maner, 2009). Adaptive social
anxiety inhibits impulsive social responses and prevents disagreeable social interactions, until the person has an opportunity to evaluate the
social situation and clarify social expectations associated with it (Maner & Kenrick, 2010).
Prior to the publication of DSM-5 (APA, 2013), in DSM-IV the distinction between SAD and normal social anxiety was based on the
individual's awareness of their response as excessive or unreasonable (APA, 1994, 2000), and their inability to regulate distress in social
situations (Klein, 1999). DSM-5 has shifted this judgement to the clinician. According to DSM-5, individuals with SAD find their social circles
becoming increasingly restricted as a result of repeated social avoidance. Their career and romantic opportunities are negatively affected due
to avoidance of social exposure entailed by work and romance. The array of normal social events that are avoided or merely endured can be
extensive ranging from the complex (e.g. family celebrations such as weddings or communions) to the simple (e.g. shopping or gardening).
In the World Health Organization's (1993) ICD-10, the term social phobia rather than SAD is used. The main diagnostic criteria are a
marked fear of being the focus of attention, or fear of behaving in a way that will be embarrassing or humiliating, and a marked avoidance
of being the focus of attention, or situations in which there is fear of behaving in an embarrassing or humiliating way. Diagnostic criteria for
DSM-5 SAD and ICD-10 social phobia are presented in Table 13.1.
Attempts have been made to identify subtypes of SAD. In DSM-5 a "performance only" subtype of SAD is included for clients whose anxiety
is restricted to speaking or performing in public. In Bögels et al.'s (2010) review paper, three domains of feared situations suggesting three
possible subtypes of SAD were identified based on results of multiple studies. These domains were: (1) fear of performance or public speaking
situations, (2) fear of social interaction situations (e.g. chitchat with unfamiliar people) and (3) fear of observation situations (e.g. being
watched while writing or eating). There was less consistent evidence for a fourth domain: fear of displaying visible signs of anxiety.
The constant revisions of the diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder have implications for treatment. The consensus would appear
to be that a treatment which focuses exclusively on the regulation of distressing symptoms is inadequate. Effective therapy needs to
address underlying issues of vulnerability, insecurity, self-consciousness and the individual's image of themselves as socially incompetent.


Numerous psychological therapies have been developed and evaluated for the treatment of SAD. These include in vivo exposure, applied
relaxation, social skills training, cognitive restructuring, cognitive bias modification, cognitive behavioural therapy, cognitive therapy,
interpersonal psychotherapy, short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy, mindfulness training, facilitated self-help and unsupported self-
help (NICE, 2013). After considering effectiveness, cost and relapse rates, in the UK NICE (2013) guidelines recommend first offering
individual cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) based on Clark and Wells's (1995) or Heimberg's (1989) psychological models of SAD. If this is
declined, then NICE (2013) recommends offering CBT-based supported self-help. Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy that has been
specifically developed to treat social anxiety disorder may also be considered (e.g. Leichsenring et al., 2007; Lipsitz et al., 1997). The cognitive
model of social phobia proposed by Clark and Wells (1995) provides a systematic comprehensive treatment approach that addresses both the
distressing symptoms that constitute this syndrome and the underlying vulnerabilities that account for its persistence and intractability.
This treatment approach will be described in detail later in the chapter.
Table 13.1 Diagnostic criteria for social anxiety disorder or social phobia
DSM-5
ICD-10
Social Anxiety Disorder
A. Marked fear or anxiety about one or more social
situations in which the individual is exposed to
possible scrutiny by others. Examples include
social interactions (e.g., having a conversation,
Social Phobia
A. Either of the following must be present:
1. marked fear of being the focus of attention, or fear of behaving in a
way that will be embarrassing or humiliating.

meeting unfamiliar people), being observed (e.g.,
eating or drinking), and performing in front of
others (e.g., giving a speech). Note: In children,
the anxiety must occur in peer settings and not
just during interactions with adults.
B. The individual fears that he or she will act in
a way or show anxiety symptoms that will be
negatively evaluated (i.e., will be humiliating
or embarrassing; will lead to rejection or offend
others).
C. The social situations almost always provoke fear
or anxiety. Note: In children, the fear or anxiety
may be expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing,
clinging, shrinking, or failing to speak in social
situations.
D. The social situations are avoided or endured
with intense fear or anxiety.
E. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the
actual threat posed by the social situation and to
the sociocultural context.
2. marked avoidance of being the focus of attention or situations in
which there is fear of behaving in an embarrassing or humiliating
way. These fears are manifested in social situations, such as eating
or speaking in public; encountering known individuals in public; or
entering or enduring small group situations, such as parties, meetings
and classrooms.
B. At least two symptoms of anxiety in the feared situation at some time since
the onset of the disorder, as defined in criterion B for F40.0 (Agoraphobia)
and in addition one of the following symptoms:
1. Blushing.
2. Fear of vomiting.
3. Urgency or fear of micturition or defecation.
C. Significant emotional distress due to the symptoms or to the avoidance.
D. Symptoms are restricted to or predominate in the feared situation or
contemplation of the feared situation.
E. Most commonly used exclusion criteria: Criteria A and B are not due to
delusions, hallucinations, or other symptoms of disorders such as organic
mental disorders, schizophrenia and related disorders, affective disorders,
or obsessive compulsive disorder, and are not secondary to cultural beliefs.
Criterion B for F40.0 (Agoraphobia) states: symptoms of anxiety in the

F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent,
typically lasting for 6 months or more.
G. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically
significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.
H. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not attributable
to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical
condition.
I. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better
explained by the symptoms of another
mental disorder, such as panic disorder, body
dysmorphic disorder, or autism spectrum
disorder.
J. If another medical condition (e.g., Parkinson's
disease, obesity, disfigurement from burns or
injury) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance
is clearly unrelated or is excessive. Specify
"performance only" if the fear is restricted to
feared situation at some time since the onset of the disorder, with at least
two symptoms present together, on at least one occasion, from the list
below, one of which must have been from items (1) to (4): Autonomic
arousal symptoms
1. Palpitations or pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
2. Sweating.
3. Trembling or shaking.
4. Dry mouth (not due to medication or dehydration).
Symptoms concerning chest and abdomen
1. 5. Difficulty breathing.
2. 6. Feeling of choking.
3. 7. Chest pain or discomfort.
4. 8. Nausea or abdominal distress (e.g. churning in stomach).
Symptoms involving mental state
1. 9. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, faint or light-headed.
2. 10. Feelings that objects are unreal (derealization), or that one's self is
distant or "not really here" (depersonalization).
3. 11. Fear of losing control, going crazy, or passing out.

speaking or performing in public. Those with
performance only social anxiety disorder do not
fear or avoid non-performance social situations.
4. 12. Fear of dying.General symptoms
5. 13. Hot flushes or cold chills.
6. 14. Numbness or tingling sensations.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993, pp. 91-93).
Epidemiology
In Western countries SAD is a relatively common disorder. In reviews of community surveys conducted largely in Western countries
since 1980, the lifetime prevalence of SAD ranged from 3.5-24% (Fehm et al., 2005; Furmark, 2002). Much variation is accounted for by
methodological factors. In the American National Comorbidity Replication Study, involving over 9,000 respondents, a lifetime prevalence
of 12.1% was reported, making SAD the third most common mental health difficulty in the US, after major depression (16.6%) and alcohol
abuse (13.2%) (Kessler et al., 2005). SAD is the most common anxiety disorder, has an early age of onset and is a risk factor for subsequent
depressive and substance use disorders (Stein & Stein, 2008). About 50% of cases develop SAD by age 11 and 80% before age 20. Only about
50% of individuals with SAD ever seek treatment, and when they do it is typically 15-20 years after onset (Fehm et al., 2005; Stein & Stein,
2008). SAD is a chronic and unremitting disorder, often persisting into old age (Cairney et al., 2007; de Wit et al., 1999).
Community surveys show that slightly more women than men suffer from SAD. In the Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiology Studies,
which included over 20,000 participants, McLean et al. (2011) found that the lifetime prevalence of SAD was 10.3% for women and 8.7% for
men. However, approximately equal numbers of males and females with SAD seek treatment (e.g. McCarthy et al., 2013).


There is significant geographic variation in SAD prevalence rates, with higher rates occurring in Western countries, suggesting an
important role for cultural factors. International prevalence rates for SAD range from 0.4% in rural Taiwan and 0.82% in Iran to 16% in
Basel, Switzerland, and 24% in Poland (Hwu et al., 1989; Mohammadi et al., 2006; Rabe-Jablonska et al., 2004; Wacker et al., 1992). Irish
prevalence rates have been estimated at 16.8% (O'Sullivan et al., 2013). Despite its prevalence in Western countries, SAD is under-recognised
in primary care and specialist mental health settings (Fehm et al., 2005).
The functional impact of SAD is wide-ranging and significant. It is associated with serious social, occupational and educational
impairments such as increased rates of school and college dropout, reduced educational attainments and lower employment levels (Fehm et
al., 2005; Lampe et al., 2003). SAD is also associated with social isolation. Those with SAD are more likely to be single, unmarried or divorced
(Eng et al., 2001). SAD places a significant economic burden on society. In the Netherlands Mental Health Survey and Incidence Study, the
financial cost of SAD to governments in relation to health service use and lost productivity was estimated at €6,000 per person per year
(Acarturk et al., 2009).
Important predisposing factors for SAD include childhood behavioural inhibition, a heritable temperamental trait, and a genetic
predisposition as indexed by a family history of social anxiety which may compromise the efficiency of the serotonergic neurotransmission
system (Stein & Stein, 2008).
Comorbidity
Among individuals with a lifetime diagnosis of SAD, 52-80% have lifetime diagnoses of at least one other psychiatric disorder (Grant et
al., 2005; Ruscio et al., 2008). The most frequently occurring comorbid conditions are mood disorders, with rates ranging from 35-70% for
major depressive disorder (MDD) and 3-21% for bipolar disorder (Perugi et al., 1999, 2001). This comorbidity is higher in older adults (APA,

2013). In addition to this, SAD is a risk factor for suicidal ideation and suicide attempts (Cougle et al., 2009). Clients with SAD note the
depressing impact of prolonged social isolation and frequent, perceived social failures and losses.
Other anxiety disorders are common among people with SAD. Koyuncua et al. (2014) found that for people with SAD comorbidity rates for
current and lifetime additional anxiety disorders were 21.5% and 27.5%, respectively. The lifetime comorbidity rates for additional specific
anxiety disorders were 14.6% for specific phobia, 9.3% for obsessive compulsive disorder, 6.1% for panic disorder, 4% for post-traumatic
stress disorder and 0.8% for general anxiety disorder.
SAD is also associated with comorbid alcohol and substance use disorders (Bandelow & Wedekind, 2014; Zahradnik & Stewart, 2009).
Many clients with social phobia acknowledge turning to alcohol or drugs as a way to ease social inhibitions, which can then lead to overuse
and dependency. Published prevalence rates for comorbid alcohol and substance misuse vary considerably. In a review of results from three
major US national surveys involving over 60,000 cases, Zahradnik and Stewart (2009) found comorbidity rates for SAD and specific alcohol
and substance abuse and dependence disorders ranging from 1.3 to 13%.
In an extensive review, Fang and Hofmann (2010) found that that 4.8-12% of individuals with SAD have a diagnosis of body dysmorphic
disorder (BDD), and 68.8% of individuals with BDD have a diagnosis of SAD.
SAD has been found to precede mood, substance misuse and eating disorders. In 72% of individuals with both social anxiety and
depression, social anxiety was found to precede depression, whereas only 5% had depression first (Regier et al., 1998). A diagnosis of major
depression has been found to follow the onset of SAD by an average of 13.2 years, but it has also been found that SAD may be a secondary
condition that remits naturally when the episode of depression has been resolved (Stein et al., 1990).
The question of the impact of comorbidity on prognosis is much debated in the literature. Several studies have noted that comorbid
depression does not negatively influence anxiety symptom outcomes following CBT (e.g. Kampman et al., 2008; McCarthy et al., 2013;
Schuurmans et al., 2009). In contrast, others have found that it predicts worse outcomes (Chambless et al., 1997, 2000; Watanabe et al.,
2010). In fact, depression levels often improve following specific treatment for SAD (Marom et al., 2009; McCarthy et al., 2013).


The cognitive model of social anxiety disorder
The cognitive model of SAD proposes that social anxiety is maintained primarily by the threat-oriented way in which individuals appraise
themselves and others in social situations, and the safety behaviours which they habitually use in an attempt to protect themselves from
what they perceive to be social threats to their well-being. Key sources for a detailed account of the cognitive model of SAD and its
therapeutic applications are Clark and Wells (1995), Wells (1998), Bates and Clark (1998), and Clark (2001). Robust clinical trials attest to the
effectiveness of CBT based on this theoretical model (e.g. Clark et al., 2003, 2006).
The development of this model was prompted by a number of perplexing features in respect to social anxiety (Butler, 1985, 1989). In
contrast to other phobias and anxieties that tended to habituate in response to prolonged, repeated exposures to feared situations, social
anxiety often persisted and became more intense despite countless, unavoidable social encounters where feared catastrophes repeatedly
failed to occur (Butler, 1985). Also, neither social skills training nor relaxation training appeared to substantially reduce social anxiety,
despite earlier assumptions that deficits in social skills and the inability to control increased arousal in social situations were critical to the
maintenance of this disorder (van Dyck, 1996).
These anomalies were addressed in the seminal work of Clark and Wells (1995), who focused on key cognitive and behavioural processes
which are activated when an individual with social anxiety enters a feared situation. These processes include:
1. Underlying beliefs and assumptions individuals hold about themselves and others;
2. A shift of attention in social situations to a negative image of self;
3. Safety strategies adopted to prevent this self from being exposed to threat;
4. The cognitive strategies used to process information and affect associated with social events prior to and following a social encounter.

A diagram of Clark and Wells's model of social anxiety is given in Figure 13.1.
Social situation
Activates assumption
Perceived social danger
Processing
of self as a
social object
Safety
behaviours
Somatic and
cognitive
symptoms

Figure 13.1 Clark and Wells's 1995 cognitive model of the processes that occur when a socially phobic individual enters a feared social situation
(reproduced by kind permission)
Underlying beliefs and assumptions
Individuals with SAD, in common with other people, have a strong desire to make a good impression on others and achieve acceptance and
a sense of belonging from others. However, underlying beliefs and assumptions they hold about themselves and others seriously limit their
confidence in being able to achieve this goal. Clark (2001) describes three categories of assumptions that may be activated in people with SAD
in feared social situations:
1. Excessively high standards for social performance. For example, "I must sound interesting and intelligent," "I must not seem in any way
odd or different."
2. Conditional beliefs regarding the consequences of acting in certain ways. For example, "If I appear in any way anxious, people will see me as
incompetent," "If I appear to blush or shake, people will think I'm weird."
3. Unconditional negative beliefs about the self. For example, "I am boring/stupid/odd," "I am damaged."
The threat of being evaluated negatively by others by others as uninteresting, incompetent, odd or boring; or anxious as indicated by some
outward manifestation of anxiety such as shakiness or blushing; or by failing to reach the high expectations which others are believed to
hold for any type of social performance, arouses a sense of dread when the socially anxious individual considers the prospect of a social
encounter. Concerns may become highly focused (e.g. "I will really blush") or remain unclear (e.g. "I will appear odd") but will always centre
on themes of behaving in some unacceptable way that will be perceived by others as grounds for a diminution of their respect, if not
for outright ridicule. Whilst many writers identified these concerns as fundamental to SAD, the unique contribution of Clark and Wells's


cognitive model was to identify a number of processes that occur when the individual becomes hijacked by these concerns, which in turn
prevent them from discovering how unfounded they are.
Shift in attention and negative image of self
A critical feature of social anxiety according to Clark and Wells (1995) is the attentional shift to bodily symptoms of anxiety that is activated
when a social encounter or performance is perceived as threatening. This is not unsurprising, as the experience of anxiety demands our
attention. It is part of its function. Unfortunately, the individual's image of themselves is then constructed on the basis of these unflattering
symptoms and how they believe they might appear to others. This image is further refined by the impact of anxiety on social skills and an
overwhelming sense of awkwardness. This social self-image is constructed from the perspective of the observer. One individual with SAD
described how, when standing in front of others to give a talk, he was convinced that he was coming across as a "gibbering wreck." When
asked to elaborate on this image of himself, he detailed what he considered to be very frightening features of his behaviour. These included
talking too fast, shaking his head uncontrollably, and shifting and moving nervously around the room. He thought that these aspects of his
behaviour were negatively perceived by others. However, this was at variance with how he appeared to his audience, who thought his talk
was interesting and informative.
Regardless of how they are actually perceived by others, the attention of those with SAD becomes focused almost exclusively on this very
negative appraisal of how they imagine they appear to others. Prolonged self-monitoring of their internal state of arousal, their negative
thoughts and their awkward behaviours and fleeting attention to the reactions of their audience, whose behaviour is generally neutral or
ambiguous, serve only to confirm their worst fears of how they are being negatively perceived, and further exacerbate their self-focused
attention. This sets up a vicious cycle that perpetuates the problem of social anxiety and reinforces their perception of the social situation as
threatening. Clark describes this dilemma in the following way:


They ... use the internal information made accessible by self-monitoring to infer how they appear to other people and what other people are
thinking of them. In this way they become trapped in a closed system in which most of their evidence for their fears is self-generated and
disconfirmatory evidence (such as other people's positive responses) becomes inaccessible or is ignored.

Safety behaviours
(Clark, 2001, p. 408, italics added)

Safety behaviours are behavioural and internal mental processes employed by socially anxious individuals to prevent some specific feared
outcome from occurring. One example would be covering one's face to conceal possible blushing. Another would be concentrating internally
on what one has just said, and checking to see if what one is about to say next follows logically, to prevent the feared catastrophe of
sounding illogical and incoherent. Unfortunately, these safety behaviours assume a vital role for individuals with SAD. They are believed
to be their only protection from certain humiliation and rejection. In fact, they are ultimately self-defeating. This is because the energy
and concentration safety behaviours require heighten anxiety, increase self-focused attention, exacerbate a negative view of the self, and
reinforce the perception of a particular social situation as dangerous. Salkovskis (1996) noted that when threatening social situations do not
turn out as predicted, people with SAD often attribute their success in these social encounters to their safety behaviours and not to their
mistaken predictions. Safety behaviours, far from serving to make social situations safer, contribute significantly to the perpetuation of the
beliefs that the world is a dangerous and unforgiving place and that if one were to "be oneself" (i.e. not use safety behaviours), rejection
would inevitably follow. One woman with SAD adamantly refused to leave her home without spending the best part of an hour meticulously
layering on make-up to conceal her blushing. When she ventured outside and related in a normal relaxed way to others, she attributed the
success of the meeting to the protective power of her make-up in concealing from others "the person who she really was."
Safety behaviours may appear to relax individuals with SAD sufficiently so that they can engage successfully with others. However, Clark
(2001) highlights the fact that safety behaviours have an unintended self-defeating drawback. This is their potential to create the impression

of "odd" behaviour in the individual with SAD, and for this to be negatively evaluated by others. A client with SAD who was terrified of
others seeing his underarm perspiration wore both a jacket and overcoat, in summertime, over his shirt. He presented in our department
with a red sweaty face and looked most uncomfortable. His flustered appearance may well have given the impression of an individual
without appropriate social skills, and suggested that some social skill training in the correct dress code for a hot summer day might have
been indicated. However, it was not a lack of social skill but rather his use of a specific safety behaviour that created the impression of being
"odd." Another client who could not bear others to see any evidence in his eyes of nervousness avoided eye contact. In doing so he created
a negative impression of being hostile and unfriendly. It is important to bear in mind that it is more likely the impact of the individual's
safety behaviours rather than specific social skill deficits that account for the negative impression people with SAD create in feared social
situations. This is one of the great ironies of safety behaviours which are put in place to conceal distress that might be negatively evaluated
and yet often attract a different kind of negative evaluation. Clinicians and other front-line staff often note how individuals presenting with
social anxiety often seem aloof, unfriendly, cold or distant and not particularly anxious. Their reliance on safety behaviours may help to
conceal their anxiety but does little for their public personas. This may explain why the earlier popularity of social skill training with this
population failed to achieve its intended effect (Heimberg, 1989; Marzillier et al., 1976; Stravynski et al., 2000).
Safety behaviours prevent individuals from ever experiencing direct or unmediated "exposure" to social situations and discovering that
their negative predictions of themselves and others are biased, if not completely untrue. Moreover, underlying assumptions regarding
others' intolerance of anxiety or vulnerability cannot be effectively tested until safety behaviours are dropped. Relaxation exercises
undertaken to regulate anxiety may fail to deliver their desired effect because they unwittingly reinforce the self-focused attention and self-
consciousness that are central to the problem of social anxiety disorder.
Reviews and previews
According to Clark and Wells (1995), SAD is partly maintained by the cognitive processes of previewing and reviewing. Previewing refers

to the negative anticipatory, catastrophising cognitive processing engaged in prior to feared social situations. The ruminative cognitive
processing that occurs after leaving feared social situations is referred to as reviewing. Facing the imminent prospect of a social encounter
or performance, individuals with SAD can become intensely anxious. Typically they recall a host of memories of previous encounters where
they perceived themselves to have failed to control their anxiety and are convinced that these negative experiences will be repeated yet again.
Clark and Wells (1995) have highlighted the destructive effects of this negative anticipatory processing or previewing, which either has the
effect of making individuals with SAD withdraw totally from the social event, or of inducing in them a high state of arousal and self-focused
attention by the time they confront it. Their mind is likely to be dominated by the expectation of failure based on previous perceptions of
failure. Their cognitive processing is likely to be so biased that they largely fail to notice positive reactions of others. Even when they do
notice positive reactions of others in social encounters, these are quickly discounted as insignificant or due to using safety behaviours.
When a feared social encounter is over, people with SAD engage in destructive reviews or "post-mortems." They ruminate on how they
may have let themselves down. Clark (2001) has described the abiding sense of shame most individuals with SAD can experience long after
a social event, regardless of how well they may have managed it. In this way, people with SAD have a tendency to accumulate evidence
from each encounter that serves to reinforce their deeper assumptions of being socially incompetent. This feature of SAD has important
clinical implications. Individuals with SAD may have positive experiences in simulated social encounters in the context of therapy sessions
(and acknowledge their achievements at the time), but a few days later their report of these events may have become distorted out of all
recognition as a result of endless biased post-mortems. They may describe these positive simulated social encounters as abject failures.
Any course of therapy for SAD needs to include a functional analysis of previewing and reviewing. Individuals with SAD need to
understand that they use previews and reviews (or post-mortems) as safety strategies to protect themselves from making embarrassing
mistakes in future social situations. Paradoxically, previews and reviews severely undermine their confidence to perform successfully in
social situations.

Assessment
Engaging with a health care professional is a social encounter, and therefore seeking professional help can be immensely anxiety-provoking
for individuals with SAD. The expectation of having to divulge personal information around which they are often profoundly embarrassed
(and in an unfamiliar setting) can be daunting. It is therefore unsurprising that many people with SAD will never seek help, or will do so only
when they reach crisis point, or have ended up in contact with mental health services for other reasons, possibly associated with comorbid
problems such as depression or substance use. Sensitivity to these fears should prepare the clinician for any off-putting behaviours (e.g. a
dismissive attitude, ambivalence regarding commitment to change) that may simply be an expression of safety behaviours that are being
employed to disguise or minimise the true extent of their anxiety.
The first contact of clients with SAD with psychology services should be a positive experience, one marked by compassion and
understanding. Services should encourage and facilitate access and avoid exacerbating a potential service user's social anxiety disorder
symptoms. For example, appointments may be offered at quieter times, or before or after normal working hours. Assessment questionnaires
can offer clients a relatively safe way of detailing the extent of their specific symptoms and their distress in social situations. Feedback to
individuals with SAD concerning highly scored items can convey a recognition of, and empathy for, their predicament and help to move the
discussion towards a more precise formulation of the sequence of events that unfolds in threatening social encounters.
Numerous validated questionnaires have been developed to evaluate the different aspects of SAD. A list of assessment instruments with
good psychometric properties is given at the end of the chapter. These have been used in empirical studies and most have been found to
be particularly helpful in monitoring response to our cognitive treatment approach in a community-based adult mental health service.
The Social Phobia Inventory (SPIN; Connor et al., 2000) has been recommended in the UK by NICE (2013) and IAPT (2011) for monitoring

of therapeutic outcomes. The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS; Heimberg et al., 1999; Liebowitz, 1987) has also been identified as a
particularly useful outcome measure (NICE, 2013).
The assessment process should provide a detailed description of the individual's current difficulties associated with social anxiety. This
will include the key event(s) in the individual's life that marked the onset of their difficulties; the consequences of social anxiety for
their quality of life and their relationships with others; the impact of social anxiety on their occupational, educational, financial and
social circumstances; and the presence of comorbid problems such as depression, drug and alcohol misuse, or social isolation. Clients'
interpersonal or systemic context and supports available to them should also be assessed in order to identify resources that they can draw
upon during recovery. Clients experiences and evaluation of useful aspects of previous treatments for SAD should be reviewed including
past and current use of psychotropic medication. A detailed assessment of a number of episodes of social anxiety should be conducted, to
evaluate the variables in Clark and Wells's (1995) model in Figure 13.1. Information from this may be summarised under the headings listed
in Box 13.1. Finally, assessment should help clients identify the specific valued life goals that they might wish to pursue if they no longer had
severe social anxiety, and their perception of how therapy might help them overcome their difficulties, begin recovery and move towards
these goals.
Clinical interventions for social anxiety
Early behavioural interventions with individuals with SAD focused on encouraging exposure to social situations in the hope that
habituation would occur and that non-safety behaviours would be reinforced by positive reactions from others (McNeil et al., 2001). Overall
this approach led to initial improvement in SAD (Andersson et al., 2006; Fava et al., 1989), but these gains were not maintained in the longer
term (Heimberg & Juster, 1995). This may have been because during behavioural exposure tasks, clients were engaging in self-directed
attention and safety behaviours which compromised the accuracy of their perception of self and others, particularly positive reactions of


others. In vivo exposure needs to take into consideration the level of self-consciousness and the range of subtle safety behaviours that may
be engaged in order for true exposure to actually occur. More recent approaches, based on Clark and Wells's (1995) model, have tended to
combine behavioural and cognitive approaches. In these cognitive behavioural approaches, exposure is seen as a critical means for bringing
new information to bear on unhelpful assumptions and biases that serve to repeatedly create experiences of social discomfort.
Box 13.1 Key elements to identify in an assessment to inform case formulation
1. Feared and avoided situations
2. List of anxiety symptoms, and list of concerns about what might happen in social encounters (e.g. being evaluated as weird or silly)
3. Details of main safety behaviours used (including alcohol and recreational drug use)
4. Quality of anticipatory and post-event processing (previews and reviews)
5. Nature of negative automatic thoughts including view of self and others
6. Nature of their self-focused attention
Cognitive-behavioural intervention for social anxiety
CBT involves working collaboratively with clients to elucidate and formulate the different mechanisms which are keeping them entrenched
in their problematic patterns of thinking, behaving and feeling. A range of cognitive and behavioural interventions are used to encourage
alternative ways of thinking, behaving and feeling, and modifying key deeper beliefs and assumptions about the self and others (Beck et al.,
1985). In this way, the cognitive approach seeks to bring about a transformation of meaning (Power & Brewin, 1997) whereby the individual

perceives his or her anxiety symptoms as a reflection of vulnerability that potentially can bring them closer to others rather than alienate
them. Learning to accept anxiety as part of any social encounter and shifting their attention to others, confident of the value of what they
have to give and of the likelihood of a positive response, becomes the goal of treatment for individuals with SAD. The cognitive model of Clark
and Wells (1995) adapts these broad principles to the problem of SAD through a series of specific steps designed to address different but
interrelated aspects of this disorder.
The remainder of this chapter focuses on clinical interventions for SAD. Since the dominant model of treatment under consideration in
this chapter is the model proposed by Clark and Wells, a detailed step-by-step outline of this approach is described with respect to individual
therapy. Briefer consideration is then given to group-based cognitive therapy and to psychodynamic and psychopharmacological approaches
to treatments of SAD.
Building a formulation of the client's unique experience of social anxiety
Once a therapeutic agenda has been agreed, the therapist and service user work collaboratively to construct an idiosyncratic formulation
of the client's experience, guided by the generic model outlined in Figure 13.1. Focusing on a recent "typical" episode of social anxiety, the
service user is asked to describe the circumstances that provoked anxiety for them and the specific fears that were activated. "What was it
exactly that you feared you would do?" "What did you imagine the consequences of your behaviour would be?" At this point the service user
can usefully be asked, "What happened next?" whereupon they may recount the specific symptoms they noticed (e.g. heart beating faster,
face growing hot, a tightening sensation in the neck). Specific safety behaviours employed can be identified by asking "When you feared you
might do [specify their particular fear], did you do anything to prevent this from happening?" or "What did you do to ensure your discomfort
would not become apparent to others in that situation?" The shift of attention to that negative construction of themselves which they feared
might be apparent to others can be identified by asking: "When you became self-conscious, did you have a picture in your mind of how
you imagined you looked to others?" Hackman et al. (2000) have reported the frequency with which these spontaneously occurring images

of self in individuals with SAD are tied to early memories of traumatic social experiences. Clark (2009) suggests it is helpful to note this
association with earlier traumas with service users and thereby suggest that their negative impressions of self may be tied more to the past
than to the present.
Self-monitoring homework exercises initiated from the very beginning of therapy help identify key components of social anxiety episodes
and draw the service user into the collaborative process of evolving a formulation of their difficulties. Table 13.2 is an example of a completed
assignment where the service user monitored her reaction to social situations that triggered anxiety and recorded her symptoms (which
she was convinced were apparent to others), her negative thoughts and the safety behaviours she employed to protect her worst fear from
happening.
Causal lines between different components of their experience can be drawn by asking such questions as “When you noticed you were
becoming hot and shaky, what effect did that have on the image of yourself you feared others would see?” or “When you were trying hard not
to appear anxious, were you feeling more or less comfortable in the situation?” It is important to draw out collaboratively with each service
user the way different aspects of their experience are interlinked to generate the vicious cycle of anxiety that constitutes their distress in
social situations.
The example in Figure 13.2 concerns David, aged 27 years, who presented with a 10-year history of widespread social anxiety. The specific
event around which the formulation was derived was the occasion of him making a presentation to his college peers, where he feared
being unable to control his anxiety and inevitably having to disclose that he was socially anxious, before walking away in disgrace. He
described how his attention was divided equally between the image of himself standing before them, tense and awkward, his hands shaking
uncontrollably, and the image of the audience to whom he was speaking. His symptoms and safety behaviours drew his attention back to
himself and resulted in increasing efforts to hide his vulnerability at all costs. The more he engaged his safety behaviours to protect him from
appearing anxious, the more compelled he felt to keep doing this at all costs. The deeper issue of the assumptions which predisposed him

to repeated episodes of this nature were addressed later and will be described later, but this provisional formulation was sufficient to move
therapy to the next stage of reconstructing his social self-image in situations such as the one he recounted.
Table 13.2 Sample homework record of reactions to typical feared social situations
Feared situation
Being introduced to
stranger in a bar
Talking to my neighbour
Standing at supermarket
checkout
Perceived physical
symptoms
Heart beating rapidly
Shaky voice Hot feeling
Abnormal breathing
Nervous Palpitations
Negative thoughts
"Oh my God, this is awful."
"How can I stop this person from
seeing what a basket case I am?"
"I'm going to shake from head to toe
and then panic and have to run out,
and leave my shopping, and have
everyone staring at me."
Safety behaviours
Avoid eye contact, hunch
shoulders Try to look "cool"
Cover face with hands Look
away
Tense up muscles to steady
myself Try to block out
thoughts of self and think of
good things

Situation
Making presentation to staff
Thoughts
Unless I can get a grip on my nervousness early
on, it will take over
I could lose control and have to explain myself
and leave
Image of self
Awkward
Hands shaking
Tense
Agitated
Safety behaviours
Hold pen tight
Talk fast
Don't allow pauses
Waving arms around to
distract from
nervousness
Anxiety symptoms
Shaky hands
Sweaty palms
Heart beating very fast
Throat dry

Figure 13.2 Idiosyncratic formulation of the experience of a client with social anxiety, making a presentation to peers
A successful formulation, one that "fits" the service user's experience, can itself be a powerful intervention. It shifts their perspective
from one of feeling shame for their failure to negotiate everyday social situations, to an appreciation of how they routinely construe social
situations as threatening and how the understandable safety behaviours they employ only serve to intensify their fears and make them
increasingly self-conscious. It also provides a rationale for the subsequent safety behaviour experiments designed to break the vicious cycle
of self-focused attention and distorted negative self-appraisal.
Safety behaviour experiment
Having identified a provisional formulation of a typical episode of social anxiety, the service user is invited to participate in a role-play of
a feared situation where they can be video-recorded under two sets of conditions, first with their safety behaviours "on" (i.e. deliberately
engaged to control their anxiety symptoms) and then with their safety behaviours "off" (i.e. where they let go of the controls and risk
allowing the worst to happen). Before recording this experiment, it is important to clarify (on the basis of the formulation) and, if necessary,
practise what exactly is required in each of these conditions. If "speaking fast" constitutes safety behaviour, what would "speaking slowly"
involve? If "curling up and making myself as insignificant as possible" was a safety strategy, what would its opposite be? Dropping safety
behaviours can be quite a disturbing prospect for many service users, and it is generally sufficient to identify and focus on two or three
critical safety behaviours for the video experiment. Some safety behaviours contaminate social encounters much more destructively (e.g.
poor eye contact) than others (e.g. fidgeting). If the feared situation concerns one-to-one social encounters, a naive volunteer from within the
organisation (or another client in a group setting) is usually invited to participate in a brief conversation with the client without informing
them of the specific purpose of this role-play. If the fear concerns presentations or performances, a number of volunteers can be recruited

to simulate an audience that is potentially threatening to the client. This is more easily achieved in a group treatment setting. These
considerations increase the likelihood of feedback that is spontaneous, truthful and credible to the individual.
In the first part of the experiment, service users are asked to engage their safety behaviours and monitor their inner experience as closely
as possible. After a short period the role-play is interrupted and the client is asked to describe how they felt during the exercise and how they
imagined they came across to others. Each of their descriptive words is rated on a 10-point scale (e.g. "How anxious/stupid/incoherent did
you feel?" "How anxious/stupid/incoherent did you feel you appeared to others?" "How would you rate your performance overall?"). These
ratings are elicited out of hearing of the audience, who will be asked for their feedback when the behavioural experiment is completed. In the
second part of the exercise, the service user is asked to continue their conversation/presentation, but to "drop" their safety behaviours and
shift their attention to their "audience." Similar ratings are taken with this segment and both sets of ratings are compared. Two important
insights emerge from these comparisons. First, clients report that their anxiety is greater when safety behaviours are used. Second, clients
may be helped to discover that their evaluation of how they appear to others is based on inner anxiety cues rather than any objective
evidence. That is, the more they feel anxious, the more they think their anxiety is apparent to others.
Feedback from the audience can have a striking impact on the service user and reveal the inaccuracies in their own estimate of how they
appear to others. From the perspective of the audience, the service user's behaviour generally seems more anxious when they are trying
to hide their nervousness by using safety behaviours than when they risk being more present and open with the audience. However, even
when the service user appears anxious to the audience, it is generally much less apparent than they had predicted. Furthermore, it can come
as a surprise to service users to learn that – contrary to impressing the listener as "anxious" or "stupid" – the impact of their use of safety
behaviours is to appear "distant," "disinterested" or "unfriendly." If the audience is composed of individuals with SAD, then the impact of this
kind of feedback can be even greater.
Video feedback can be employed in this model because it has unique potential for offering service users feedback on their observable self
in social situations. In their single case study detailing the process of reconstructing the social self-image of a socially anxious woman, Lynn


(Bates & Clark, 1998), scores on the social cognition questionnaire showed a dramatic shift after she watched a video conversation that had
been staged between her and a staff member at the mental health service. This feedback, more than any other, revealed to her how distorted
her evaluation was of her presentation.
The discrepancy between the relatively positive video image of the client and the much more negative self-image she had of herself was
striking and had a strong impact on her. Even those moments where she appeared slightly awkward or uneasy were not nearly as obvious in
Lynn's own judgement as she had predicted. Furthermore, she saw that many of her apparent social difficulties were merely the observable
effects of her safety behaviours and she saw how these disappeared in the second part of the experiment when she "dropped" these
behaviours.
(Bates & Clark, 1998, pp. 296-297)
Clark (2001) highlights the need for care and preparation in having the service user watch a video replay of themselves. There is a risk that
clients may re-experience feelings they had in the role-play while viewing the video and processing themselves through the "lens" of these
feelings. To minimise this risk, service users can be assigned homework after the role-play session and asked to write out their predictions of
what they will see when they watch the video, operationalising their "felt sense" of how they will appear, and rating each of their predictions
on a 10-point scale. When they eventually view the recording they are advised to watch themselves as though they are watching a stranger,
focusing on observable behaviours and evaluating these objectively.
Shifting attention and testing negative predictions
The next task for service users is to practise shifting their attention from the self to others; that is, to focus their attention on the external
situation so that they can accurately observe feedback from others, and process this potentially positive feedback. This attentional control
training helps offset the debilitating aspect of self-consciousness, where clients focus on their internal anxiety symptoms, and assume that
their negative view of themselves and their anxiety is shared by others. The concept of attentional control is very similar to some of the core

principles of mindfulness which is described in Chapter 9. Improved attentional control enables the service user to break the vicious cycle
of anxiety hijacking self-awareness. Once clients become aware of their anxiety which they believe compromises their social presentation,
this awareness escalates anxiety levels. They become anxious about appearing anxious to others. The goal is to become aware of the social
world around them. This practice of attentional control and other awareness can be practised out of sessions. Many service users find it
easier initially to practise in low-anxiety situations, and some start by simply people-watching from afar. Also, because of attentional biases,
individuals with SAD tend to selectively attend to information in their social world that is consistent with their unhelpful beliefs (e.g. I am
not likeable). Service users can be encouraged to attend to social information that is inconsistent with this belief. This can take the form of a
daily journal in which social interactions that suggest they are likeable are noted and recorded (e.g. compliments, smiles and other prosocial,
non-verbal gestures). Wells (1997) refers to this strategy as maintaining a "positive data log." Clinicians should be alert to the tendency of
people with SAD to use qualifiers, "yes, but ..." that can subtly undermine the benefit of this strategy.
Individuals with SAD invariably have rigid ideas of what constitutes acceptable social behaviours. Living within a narrow definition of
"acceptable behaviour" increases the likelihood of social failure. This exacerbates the sense of risk associated with social situations. Service
users should be encouraged to experiment with altering their ideas of what constitutes socially acceptable behaviours. They may be invited
to entertain the idea of "breaking their own rules" and observing what happens. The service user David, with a fear of drying up in the
middle of a presentation, deliberately gave himself permission to pause momentarily mid-sentence on a number of occasions during his talk.
He discovered that such supposed misdemeanours went unnoticed, and from the feedback of his audience learned that his slowing down
improved the impact of his presentation style. Repeated experiments such as these serve to modify beliefs regarding "dangers" in social
situations and help service users construct more accurate images of their own performances. Since individuals with SAD often harbour
excessively high standards for social performance, these behavioural experiments help them realise the extent to which other people can
accept a wide variation of standards that fall short of perfection.


Modifying dysfunctional assumptions
As service users experience a greater freedom to "be themselves" and take risks to relate to others in a more spontaneous way, therapy may
become attentive to critical early experiences that have contributed to fears of being ridiculed and rejected. Childhood experiences and
traumatic memories that left them feeling inadequate and ashamed become the appropriate focus of later sessions. As these experiences are
revisited, the service user becomes able to identify the core beliefs and the assumptions these gave rise to, and to weave these into a more
comprehensive, developmental formulation of their social anxiety. David, whose provisional formulation is outlined in Figure 13.2,
described early family experiences that had a direct bearing on his later difficulties in social encounters. He grew up in a family where there
were constant injunctions to look right and act right. "Either you do it perfectly or not at all" was the family motto. Another dominant
memory was constantly trying to cover up for any minor shortcomings because the consequence of being found out was a pressure to
"justify" oneself to others. "Don't disclose anything to anyone because it will be held against you" seemed to capture the essence of his
experience. Both of these assumptions were activated in social situations where his performance might fall short. His reluctance to show
initiative at college unless he could "do it perfectly" often resulted in him opting out, or remaining silent at meetings where he had an
important contribution to make. In addition, his anxiety in these situations was aggravated by his assumption that any evidence of anxiety
would require him to make a full disclosure of his inner insecurities, which in turn would leave him very vulnerable to invasive enquiries
about his emotional life at college. David had never felt right in exercising his boundaries and was hampered by the belief "If I do something
inappropriate, I owe it to others to explain and justify the reasons why." Towards the close of therapy, he modified this assumption to "It's OK
just to have a position, and not always justify my position." Homework was assigned to encourage him to test this new belief in the context
of his episodes of social anxiety. Not only did he allow himself to "just do what has to be done" rather than "do it perfectly," he practised
owning and disclosing normal anxiety at peer meetings without explaining the reasons why. Gradually, he became less troubled by signs of
anxiety, comfortable in the knowledge that such experiences are universal and do not require inappropriate personal disclosures.

Therapy could now revisit David's goals for his life, which he had outlined in the opening session when he was asked what he might want
to do differently if he was not hampered by social anxiety. His improved self-understanding and an appreciation of his courage and resilience
in confronting his fears enabled him to set new goals and leave therapy confident that they were within his reach. Whilst his feelings and
felt sense of how he performed had previously determined his image of self and his behaviour in social situations, his changing appraisal of
himself and others could begin to transform his behaviours and feelings in each encounter.

Recovery blueprint
The final phase of this therapeutic approach is to have the service user write out a summary of the critical insights and strategies they will
take from therapy and identify some immediate and long-term goals they wish to pursue. Standard questions that might be included in a
recovery blueprint are set out in Box 13.2. This exercise is given as a written homework assignment in the penultimate session. In our group
programmes we have structured our last meetings around each member of the group reading aloud their personal blueprint. Particular
emphasis is given to the unique personal strengths they displayed in the course of therapy and how these might serve as important resources
for them in months ahead. The inevitability of setbacks is also discussed in individual and group therapy and access to emotional and social
supports are explored.

Evidence in support of the cognitive model of social anxiety disorder
The Clark and Wells model (1995) outlined earlier offers a number of hypotheses that have been subjected to a wealth of experimental
studies. Overall, there is a growing body of evidence in support of specific features of their model. While some evidence is emerging to
suggest that anxiety, thinking and social performance may be influence by self-focused attention (e.g. Mellings & Alden, 2000; Saboonchi
et al., 1999; Spurr & Stopa, 2002; Woody & Rodriguez, 2000), it remains inconsistent and there are few directly relevant studies. However,
therapeutic interventions aimed at reducing self-focused attention are often associated with improvement in levels of social anxiety


(Hofmann, 2000; Woody et al., 1997). In addition, individuals with SAD are clearly impaired in their processing of external cues when
anxious (Chen et al., 2002; Horley et al., 2004) and consistently generate distorted observer-perspective images of themselves, which appear
most often to be a reactivation of early images of themselves that were provoked by early traumatic experiences (Hackman et al., 2000).
Because these images may reflect unprocessed traumatic experiences, and because the attention of the service user is self-focused in anxious
situations, they are seldom updated in the light of positive encounters and so continue to recur. The potential for safety behaviours to
inadvertently increase social anxiety (Morgan & Raffle, 1999; Wells et al., 1995), post-event processing (Mitchell & Schmidt, 2014), negative
social judgements (Taylor & Alden, 2010) and self-presentation concerns (Moscovitch et al., 2013) have been consistently demonstrated
in the literature. The positive impact on social anxiety of reducing safety behaviours has also been well established (McManus et al.,
2008; Okajima et al., 2009). While individuals with SAD employ safety behaviours to protect themselves from negative social evaluations,
paradoxically these safety behaviours, utilised to deflect negative evaluations, in fact lead to negative evaluations, for example, cold or
distant (Alden & Bieling, 1998; Alden & Wallace, 1995; Curtis & Miller, 1986). Friendly, open prosocial behaviours and reciprocal self-
disclosure are the core building blocks of successful relationships.
Box 13.2 Developing a personal recovery blueprint
1. What are key fears/predictions that are activated when I enter a social situation?
2. What have I learned about these fears?
3. How do I contribute to keeping myself anxious when I enter feared situations?
4. How might I behave differently in feared situations to reduce my anxiety?
5. What goals can I set for myself in the weeks ahead?

6. What strengths/supports do I have to draw on to achieve these goals?
CBT effectiveness
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses show that CBT for SAD leads to better outcomes than waiting-list and placebo control groups, and is
as effective in the short term as exposure therapy and pharmacological intervention (Acarturk et al., 2009; Canton et al., 2012; Chambless &
Hope, 1996; Fedoroff & Taylor, 2001; Feske & Chambless, 1995; Gould et al., 1997; Rodebaugh et al., 2004; Taylor, 1996; Wong et al., 2012).
Only three studies have evaluated the long-term effects of CBT for SAD. In each of these, clients receiving CBT showed greater maintenance of
treatment gains or protection against relapse than clients who received pharmacological interventions (Clark et al., 2003; Haug et al., 2003;
Liebowitz et al., 1999). The meta-analyses cited earlier show that CBT for SAD leads to large effect. For example, Canton et al. (2012) found
an effect size of d = 0.86. In the meta-analysis included in the UK NICE (2013) guidelines on the treatment of social anxiety, effect sizes of
d = 1.19 for individual CBT and d = 0.85 for cognitive-behavioural group therapy (CBGT) were found. The most impressive outcome results
achieved in the psychological treatment of SAD to date are those of Clark et al. (2003). In this study CBT was compared to fluoxetine plus
self-exposure, and placebo plus self-exposure. After treatment effect sizes for CBT ranged from d = 2.14 to 2.53 across a series of different
outcome instruments. These treatment gains were maintained at 12-month follow-up.
Most evaluations of CBT for SAD have been efficacy studies conducted in research environments rather than routine health service
settings. Exceptions to this include benchmark studies conducted by McEvoy in Australia (2007) and McCarthy et al. (2013) in Ireland.
McEvoy (2007) compared clinical outcomes from a community mental health-based CBT group treatment programme with those of
published efficacy studies and found them to be comparable. McEvoy's (2007) group treatment programme was based on the Clark and Wells
(1995) model and offered 153 participants seven weekly sessions of 4 hours' duration. Outcome measures included the Social Interaction

Anxiety Scale (Mattick & Clark, 1998), the Social Phobia Scale (Mattick & Clark, 1998) and the Beck Depression Inventory (Beck et al., 1988).
The mean effect size was d = 0.9. Similar encouraging results were obtained by McCarthy et al. (2013) in a study conducted at an outpatient
mental health service attached to a university hospital in Ireland. There were 252 participants in this study. They competed a group
treatment programme based on Clark and Wells (1995) model, and the mean effect size was d = 1.06.
Cognitive-behavioural group therapy (CBGT) versus individual CBT
The primary CBT treatment model adopted in the US is that developed by Heimberg and Becker (2003), while clinicians in the UK and Europe
mostly base their work on the model developed by Clark and Wells (1995). These models have formed the basis for a considerable body of
research on both the descriptive psychopathology of SAD and on approaches to its treatment since Hofmann and DiBartolo (2010), Roth and
Heimberg (2001), and Wong et al. (2012). Both models were informed by clinical observations of individuals with SAD. Each model offers
an explanation of the key facets of the disorder and accounts for its long-term maintenance (Roth & Heimberg, 2001; Schultz & Heimberg,
2008). While these models are very similar, they are not identical. So, while both models emphasise the role of attentional processes in the
maintenance of social anxiety, Clark and Wells (1995) propose that self-focused attention is the most important or core attentional process
that generates anxiety, negatively impacts social performance, and inhibits the processing of information inconsistent with social fear
(Schultz & Heimberg, 2008). In contrast, Heimberg's model, while acknowledging the role of self-focused attention, also emphasises the role
of external vigilance to social threats, a process that is absent from the Clark and Wells model.
Heimberg and his colleagues focused on the development of a successful CBGT programme, while Clark and Wells (1995) focused on
an individualised treatments protocol. CBGT is a structured, manualised approach that aims to disrupt the cycle of social anxiety through
exposure (both in group sessions and in the service user's natural environment) and cognitive restructuring. The programme is offered to
groups of six service users who meet for weekly sessions lasting approximately 2.5 hours over a period of 12 weeks. For a detailed description

of this approach, the reader is referred to Heimberg and Juster (1995), Coles et al. (2001), or Heimberg and Becker (2003). Individual CBT
according to the Clark and Wells model should consist of up to 14 sessions of 90 minutes' duration over a 4-month period.
Research comparing individual CBT to CBGT for social anxiety has, to date, produced mixed outcomes (Rodebaugh et al., 2004; Stangier
et al., 2003). Stangier et al. (2003) randomly assigned participants to CBGT, individual intervention or waiting-list control. Clients in both
CBGT and individual modalities received 15 weekly sessions using the Clark and Wells (1995) treatment model. Individual CBT therapy was
superior to CBGT on specific measures of social anxiety (e.g. Social Interaction Anxiety Scale, CBT, d = 0.85 vs. CBGT, d = 0.53). Rodebaugh
et al. (2004) reviewed five meta-analyses that specifically addressed the treatment of SAD using a CBT approach (Chambless & Hope, 1996;
Fedoroff & Taylor, 2001; Feske & Chambless, 1995; Gould et al., 1997; Taylor, 1996) and noted that the meta-analyses included a range of
CBT-type interventions including behavioural exposure, cognitive restructuring, social skills training (SST) and applied relaxation, which
were employed in various combinations and in both group and individual formats. Rodebaugh et al. (2004) concluded that there was little
evidence to suggest that either the group or individual format produced better outcomes. They noted the discrepancy between their meta-
analysis and Stangier et al.'s (2003) findings, and suggested that the Clark and Wells (1995) treatment model might be less effective in a
group format.
There are also divergent opinions on the most cost-effective way to deliver CBT for SAD. In the US, where CBGT for SAD is widely used,
it has been argued that a group format is at least twice as cost-effective as individual CBT (e.g. Gould et al., 1997). However, in the UK
where individual CBT for SAD is widely used, NICE (2013) guidelines for the treatment of SAD - which utilised sophisticated economic
modelling techniques to determine cost issues – do not recommend group-based CBT intervention. While the guidelines recognise that CBGT
is successful in terms of outcomes, it contends that it is difficult to recruit socially anxious individuals and is overall less cost-effective than
individual CBT. However, its analysis was based on group interventions for 30 hours, offered by two therapists to six clients, involving 10
hours of therapist time per service user (NICE, 2013, table 20, p. 172). However, CBGT using larger groups involving up to nine service users

have been shown to be as effective as Heimberg's CBGT involving smaller group numbers (e.g. McCarthy et al., 2013; McEvoy, 2007). The
relative cost-effectiveness of individual versus group CBT remains to be resolved.
Self-help stepped-care interventions
There has been a growing interest in designing novel ways to offer cost effective CBT for SAD within a stepped-care model of service delivery.
Various self-help programmes have been developed and evaluated. These have included self-help bibliotherapy (e.g. Abramowitz et al., 2009;
Chung & Kwon, 2008) and Internet (e.g. Andrews et al., 2011; Titov et al., 2008, 2009) programmes, with and without psychotherapist
support. The early findings from evaluations of these programmes are very promising. Self-help models with psychotherapist support
(typically 2-3 hours of phone or face-to-face contact) tends to produce better results than those without such support. In one randomised
controlled study, Internet CBT proved to be as effective as traditional face-to-face group CBT (Andrews et al., 2011).
Other therapeutic approaches
Other forms of psychotherapy have been used treat SAD with various levels of success. These include manualised short-term
psychodynamic psychotherapy (STPP; Leichsenring et al., 2007), interpersonal psychotherapy (Lipsitz et al., 1997), mindfulness-based
stress reduction (Jazaieri et al., 2012), supportive psychotherapy (Lipsitz et al., 2008), social skills training (Dam-Baggen & Kraaimaat, 2000),
applied relaxation (Clark et al., 2006) and aerobic exercise (Jazaieri et al., 2012).
STPP, specifically developed for social anxiety (Leichsenring et al., 2007), was recommended as an effective and cost-effective treatment
for SAD in the UK NICE (2013) guidelines. In one large multicentre study (n = 495), the outcomes of STPP, CBT and waiting-list control
groups were compared (Leichsenring et al., 2009). On the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (Liebowitz, 1987) large, significant and similar
improvements occurred for the STPP and CBT groups, but not the waiting-list control group.


STPP is based on the assumption that social anxiety and associated behavioural avoidance are related to unconscious psychodynamic
conflicts. It posits that individuals with SAD have had negative childhood experiences of being criticised, ridiculed, or humiliated by parents,
siblings or significant others. These experiences are internalised and then frequently projected onto people in their environment who are
then avoided, for fear of criticism and rejection. Unconscious defence mechanisms are then used to defend against hostile wishes and
fantasies surrounding these early core conflictual relationships. From a psychodynamic point of view, social anxiety is both a symptom of
this conflict and a punishment for harbouring hostile fantasies. Avoidance behaviour is understood as a way of avoiding social triggers that
provoke this conflict in conscious awareness.
The psychotherapeutic technique used in STPP is derived from Malan's (1976) focused, short-term psychoanalytic psychotherapy. In this
framework, the core conflictual relationship is hinged on three components: a desire (e.g. "I wish to be accepted by others"), an imagined
response from others (e.g. "Others will reject me") and a response from the self (e.g. "I'm afraid to approach others"). This response from
the self represents the various symptoms of social anxiety. Expressive interventions aims to help the individual with social anxiety become
aware of the link between conflicts and symptoms. Supportive interventions include interpretations, reassurance and encouragement. Self-
affirming inner dialogues are also encouraged. Individuals are also encouraged to expose themselves to feared social situations outside
therapy sessions. Establishing a secure therapeutic alliance is one of the model's most important supportive treatment elements, as the
therapeutic relationship is viewed as central for insight and change.
Pharmacotherapy for social anxiety
Various classes of psychotropic medications have been evaluated in clinical trials to determine their usefulness in the treatment of SAD.
These include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs), anticonvulsants, antipsychotics, benzodiazepines and beta-blockers.

The success of SSRIs for depression prompted research on their applications to SAD. Paroxetine was the first SSRI to be given approval by
the US Food and Drug Administration in the treatment of SAD. However, due to troublesome side effects and discontinuation symptoms
paroxetine has since fallen out of favour. Currently, the SSRIs escitalopram and sertraline are recommended as first-line drug treatments for
social anxiety (NICE, 2013). In a clinical trial by Liebowitz et al. (2003), sertraline produced a significantly greater reduction in scores on the
Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS; Liebowitz, 1987) when compared with placebo controls. In a similar double-blind study by Kasper et
al. (2005), individuals prescribed escitalopram reported a significantly greater reduction in scores on the LSAS in comparison to the placebo
condition. If these medications are not effective in a particular case, then either fluoxetine or fluvoxamine, both SSRIs, may be considered
(NICE, 2013). The UK NICE (2013) guidelines also recommend venlafaxine (Effexor), an SNRI as a potential second-line drug choice. While
venlafaxine has proved effective as a first-line SSRI, its side effect and discontinuation profile is less favourable (Asakura et al., 2007).
MAOIs have also been shown in numerous research trials to be effective in the treatment of SAD in particular, phenelzine and
moclobemide. The UK NICE (2013) guidelines recommend MOAIs only as a third-line option.
While some of the benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam, have been shown to be effective in the treatment of SAD (e.g. Otto et al., 2000),
they are rarely prescribed now due to concerns about the development of tolerance and dependence.
Beta-blockers decrease the autonomic manifestations of anxiety including tachycardia, tremor, perspiring, blushing and dry mouth.
They have been commonly used by individuals with non-generalised performance anxiety and have been noted to be especially popular
among musicians. They have the advantage over benzodiazepines of rarely impairing concentration or coordination. However, there is no
substantial evidence to support the use of beta-blockers for SAD (Turner et al., 1994).
There is growing evidence for the effectiveness of new anticonvulsants (especially pregabalin and gabapentin) in the treatment of SAD
(Feltner et al., 2001; Pande et al., 1999). Unfortunately, this class of medications is also associated with unwanted side effects including
somnolence, dizziness, dry mouth, nausea and decreased libido.


There is currently no evidence to recommend the use of antipsychotic medications for individuals with SAD. Neither is there sufficient
evidence to recommend the use of botulinum toxin for the treatment of hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) associated with social anxiety, or
endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy for the alleviation of blushing or/and sweating.
A concern that arises, in terms of a cognitive formulation, is whether the use of any medication might be incorporated by service users as
part of their repertoire of safety behaviours and thereby contribute to the maintenance of SAD. It is hard to deny that some medications work
for some clients, at least in the short term, but their mechanisms of action are poorly understood and their capacity to help socially anxious
individuals make sense of their condition is limited.

Summary
This chapter has presented an overview of the classification, aetiology, assessment and treatment options in respect to social anxiety.
It highlights the integrated cognitive model proposed by Clark and Wells (1995). Evidence in support of the theoretical premises of
this approach has been most encouraging, with its treatment effectiveness in large-scale controlled studies now well established. Other
cognitive behavioural approaches have also shown the efficacy of specific interventions for social anxiety with interesting developments
in terms of Internet-delivered CBT. There is also increasing support for other therapeutic approaches, especially short-term psychoanalytic
psychotherapy. Medication has also become an increasing focus of interest as an alternative intervention, but the primarily psychological
and social origin of this disorder suggests that a structured psychotherapy model of intervention provides the most obvious possibility of an
enduring recovery.
Unfortunately, a significant number of individuals who receive the treatment of choice, CBT, fail to respond, drop out of treatment, need
additional treatment, continue to experience lingering symptoms, or show a return of symptoms at follow-up assessments (e.g. Barlow et
al., 2000; Borkovec & Costello, 1993). Large clinical trials of CBT efficacy for the various anxiety disorders have produced non-response rates


of up to 49% for SAD (e.g. Davidson et al., 2004). So, while admirable advancements have been made in the treatment of this debilitating
condition, further progress is need. Future research will be required to identify subgroups of individuals who will respond differentially to
one treatment over another, thereby facilitating treatment decisions and optimising outcomes.

Exercises
Divide into groups of three and assign roles of clinical psychologist; the client, David; and an observer. Prepare and then role-play part of a
session where the psychologist works with David, and alternate roles after each of the following scenarios:
1. Build an individualised formulation of David's difficulty by asking him to describe in detail a recent social situation in which he felt
anxious.
2. Review homework David completed in which he identified the feared social situation, the perceived physical symptoms, his negative
thoughts and safety behaviours. The therapist should try to help David to make connections between physical, cognitive and
behavioural aspects of the situation.
3. Design a role-play experiment with David. The experiment is in two parts, the first in which he uses his safety behaviours in a situation,
and the second in which he gives up his safety behaviours. Explain to him that the role-play will be video-recorded so that you and he can
review it afterwards, and the reasons for this. Help him to identify what exactly the safety behaviours are that he will be using in part 1
of the experiment, for example, avoiding eye contact. Help him also to define the behaviours he will use in part 2, for example, making
eye contact.
After the role-plays, the observer may give feedback to the person who was in the role of the psychologist, including at least three positive
aspects of their behaviour in the role, and no more than two suggestions for improving their clinical practice.


Further reading for practitioners
Andrews, G., Creamer, M., Crino, R., Hunt, C., Lampe, L., & Page, A. (2003). The Treatment of Anxiety Disorders. Clinician's Guides and
Patient Manuals (Second Edition, Chapters 8–11). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Butler, G., Fennell, M., & Hackman, A. (2010). Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for Anxiety Disorders: Mastering Clinical Challenges. (Guides
to Individualized Evidence-Based Treatment). New York: Guilford Press.
Free, M. L. (1999). Cognitive Therapy in Groups: Guidelines and Resources for Practice. Chichester: Wiley.
Heimberg, R. G., & Becker, R. E. (2003). Cognitive-Behavioural Group Therapy for Social Phobia; Basic Mechanisms and Clinical Strategies.
New York: Guilford.
Wells, A. (1997). Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders. A Practice Manual and Conceptual Guide (Chapter 7). Chichester: Wiley.
Assessment instruments
Brown, T. A., DiNardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). The Anxiety Disorder Interview Schedule for DSM-IV-Adult Version (ADIS). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Carleton, R. N., Collimore, K. C., & Asmundson, G.J.G. (2007). Social anxiety and fear of negative evaluation: Construct validity of the
BFNE-II. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 21, 131-141.
Collins, K. A., Westra, H. A., Dozois, D.J.A., & Stewart, S. H. (2005). The validity of the brief version of the Fear of Negative Evaluation
Scale. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 19, 345-359.


Connor, K. M., Davidson, J.R.T., Churchill, L. E., Sherwood, A., Foa, E., & Weisler, R. H. (2000). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia
Inventory (SPIN): New self rating scale. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 379-386.
Cuming, S., Rapee, R. M., Kemp, N., Abbott, N. J., Peters, L., & Gaston, J. E. (2009). A self-report measure of subtle avoidance and safety
behaviours relevant to social anxiety: Development and psychometric properties. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 879-883.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Fresco, D. M., Coles, M. E., Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hami, S., Stein, M. B., & Goetz, D. (2001). The Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale:
A comparison of the psychometric properties of self-report and clinician-administered formats. Psychological Medicine, 31, 1025-1035.
Heimberg, R. G., Mueller, G., Holt, C. S., Hope, D. A., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1992). Assessment of anxiety in social interaction and being
observed by others: The Social Interaction Anxiety Scale and the Social Phobia Scale. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23, 53-73.
Leary, M. R. (1983). A brief version of the Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 371-375.
Liebowitz, M. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems in Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141-173. Contains the Social Anxiety Scale.
Mattick, R., & Clark, J. (1998). Development and validation of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social interaction anxiety.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 455-470. Contains the Social Phobia Scale Social and the Interaction Anxiety Scale.
Turner, S., Beidel, D., Dancu, C., & Stanley, M. (1989). An empirically derived inventory to measure social fears and anxiety: The Social
Phobia and Anxiety Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 1, 35-40.
Wells, A. (1997). Social Cognitions Questionnaire. In A. Wells (Ed.), Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders. A Practice Manual and
Conceptual Guide (pp. 28-30). Chichester: Wiley.


Evidence summary

Canton, J., Scott, K. M., & Glue, P. (2012). Optimal treatment of social phobia: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychiatric
Disease and Treatment, 8, 203-215.
Wong, J., Gordon, E., & Heimberg, R. (2012). Social anxiety disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based Practice
in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 621-650). Chichester: Wiley.

Further reading for clients

Butler, G. (2009). Overcoming Social Anxiety and Shyness: A Self-Help Guide to Using Cognitive Behavioural Techniques. London: Constable
& Robinson.
Dayhoff. S. A. (2010). Diagonally-Parked in a Parallel Universe: Working Through Social Anxiety (Second Edition). Placitas, NM:
Effectiveness-Plus Publications.
Markway, B. G., & Pollard, A. (1992). Dying of Embarrassment: Help for Social Anxiety and Social Phobia. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Martin, M. A., & Swinson, R. P. (2008). The Shyness & Social Anxiety Workbook; Proven Techniques for Overcoming your Fears (Second
Edition). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Rapee, R. (1997). Overcoming Shyness and Social Phobia: A Step-by-Step Guide. Killara, NSW: Lifestyle.


References
Abramowitz, J. S., Moore, E., Braddock, A. E., & Harrington, D. L. (2009). Self-help cognitive-behavioural therapy with minimal therapist
contact for social phobia: A controlled trial. Journal of Behaviour Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 40, 98-105.
Acarturk, C., Smit, F., de Graaf, R., van Straten, A., ten Have, M., & Cuijpers, P. (2009). Economic costs of social phobia: A population-based
study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 115, 421-429.
Alden, L. E., & Bieling, P. (1998). Interpersonal consequences of the pursuit of safety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 53-65.
Alden, L. E., & Crozier, R. W. (2001). Social anxiety as a clinical condition. In W. R. Crozier & L. E. Alden (Eds.), International Handbook of
Social Anxiety Concepts, Research and Interventions Relating to the Self and Shyness (pp. 327-334). Chichester: Wiley.
Alden, L. E., & Wallace, S. T. (1995). Social phobia and social appraisal in successful and unsuccessful social interactions. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 33, 945-957.
American Psychiatric Association. (1952). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Second Edition (DSM-II). Arlington, VA:
Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition (DSM-III). Arlington, VA:
Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised (DSM-III-R).
Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition, DSM-IV). Washington,
DC: Author.


American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition-Text Revision, DSM-IV-
TR). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA:
Author.
Andersson, G., Carlbring, P., Holmström, A., Sparthan, E., Furmark, T., Nilsson-Ihrfelt, E., ... Lisa, M. (2006). Internet-based self-help
with therapist feedback and in vivo group exposure for social phobia: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 74, 677-686.
Andrews, G., Davies, M., & Titov, N. (2011). Effectiveness randomized controlled trial of face to face versus internet cognitive behaviour
therapy for social phobia. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 45, 337-340.
Asakura, S., Tajima, O., & Koyama, T. (2007). Fluvoxamine treatment of generalized social anxiety disorder in Japan: A randomized
double-blind, placebo-controlled study. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 10, 263-274.
Bandelow, B., & Wedekind, D. (2014). Social phobia. Der Nervenarzt, 85, 635-647.
Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M., & Woods, S. W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioural therapy, imipramine, or their combination for panic
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283, 2529-2536.
Bates, A., & Clark, D. M. (1998). A new cognitive treatment for social phobia: A single-case study. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 12,
289-322.
Beck, A. T., Emery, G., & Greenberg, R. L. (1985). Anxiety Disorders and Phobias: A Cognitive Perspective. New York: Basic Books.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Garbin, R. A. (1988). Psychometric properties of the Beck Depression Inventory. Twenty five years of evaluation.
Clinical Psychology Review, 8, 77-100.
Bögels, S. M., Alden, L., Beidel, D. C., Clark, L. A., Pine, D. S., Murray, B., ... Voncken, M. (2010). Social anxiety disorder: Questions and
answers for the DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 168-189.


Borkovec, T. D., & Costello, E. (1993). Efficacy of applied relaxation and cognitive-behavioural therapy in the treatment of generalized
anxiety disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 611-619.
Butler, G. (1985). Exposure as a treatment for social phobia: Some instructive difficulties. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23, 651-657.
Butler, G. (1989). Issues in the application of cognitive and behavioural strategies to the treatment of social phobia. Clinical Psychology
Review, 9, 91-106.
Cairney, J., McCabe, L., Veldhuizen, S., Corna, L. M., Streiner, D., & Herrmann, N. (2007). Epidemiology of social phobia in later life.
American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15, 224-233.
Canton, J., Scott, K. M., & Glue, P. (2012). Optimal treatment of social phobia: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychiatric
Disease and Treatment, 8, 203-215.
Chambless, D. L., Beck, A. T., Gracely, E. J., & Grisham, J. R. (2000). Relationship of cognitions to fear of somatic symptoms: A test of the
cognitive theory of panic. Depression and Anxiety, 11, 1-9.
Chambless, D. L., & Hope, D. A. (1996). Cognitive approaches to the psychopathology and treatment of social phobia. In P. M. Salkovskis
(Ed.), Frontiers of Cognitive Therapy (pp. 345-382). New York: Guilford.
Chambless, D. L., Tran, G. Q., & Glass, C. R. (1997). Predictors of response to cognitive-behavioural group therapy for social phobia.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11, 221-240.
Chen, Y. P., Ehlers, A., Clark, D. M., & Mansell, W. (2002). Patients with social phobia direct their attention away from faces. Behaviour
Research & Therapy, 40, 677-687.
Chung, Y. S., & Kwon, J. H. (2008). The efficacy of bibliotherapy for social phobia. Brief Treatment and Crisis Intervention, 8, 390-401.
Clark, D. M. (2001). A cognitive perspective on social phobia. In W. R. Crozier & L. E. Alden (Eds.), International Handbook of Social Anxiety.
Concepts, Research and Interventions Relating to the Self and Shyness (pp. 405-430). New York: Wiley & Sons.


Clark, D. M. (2009). Cognitive behaviour therapy for anxiety disorders. In M. Gelder, N. Anderson, J. Lopez-Ibor, & J. Geddes (Eds.), New
Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry (Second Edition, Volume 2, Section 6.3.2.1, pp. 1285-1298). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., Hackmann, A., McManus, F., Fennell, M., Grey, N., Waddington, N., & Jennifer, L. W. (2006). Cognitive therapy
versus exposure and applied relaxation in social phobia: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74,
568-578.
Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., McManus, F., Hackmann, A., Fennell, M., Campbell, H., ... Louis, B. (2003). Cognitive therapy versus fluoxetine in
generalized social phobia: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 1058-1067.
Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In R. Heimberg, M. Leibowitz, D. A. Hope, & F. R. Schneier (Eds.), Social
phobia: Diagnosis, assessment and treatment (pp. 69-93). New York: Guilford Press.
Coles, M., Hart, T. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2001). Cognitive-behavioural group treatment for social phobia. In W. R. Crozier & L. E. Alden
(Eds.), International Handbook of Social Anxiety: Concepts, Research and Interventions Relating to the Self and Shyness (pp. 449-469).
Chichester: Wiley.
Connor, K. M., Davidson, J. R., Churchill, L. E., Sherwood, A., Foa, E., & Weisler, R. H. (2000). Psychometric properties of the Social Phobia
Inventory (SPIN). New self-rating scale. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 379-386.
Cougle, J. R., Keough, M. E., Riccardi, C. J., & Sachs-Ericsson, N. (2009). Anxiety disorders and suicidality in the National Comorbidity
Survey-Replication. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 43, 825-829.
Curtis, R. C., & Miller, K. (1986). Believing another likes or dislikes you: Behaviours making the beliefs come true. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 51, 284-290.
Dam-Baggen, R. V., & Kraaimaat, F. (2000), Group Social Skills Training or Cognitive Group Therapy as the Clinical Treatment of Choice
for Generalized Social Phobia? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 14, 437-451.


Davidson, J., Foa, E., Huppert, J., Keefe, F., Franklin, M., Compton, J., & Gadde, K. M. (2004). Fluoxetine, comprehensive cognitive
behavioural therapy, and placebo in generalized social phobia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 1005-1013.
De Wit, D. J., Ogborne, A., Offord, D. R., & MacDonald, K. (1999). Antecedents of the risk of recovery from DSM-III-R social phobia.
Psychological Medicine, 29, 569-582.
Eng, W., Heimberg, R. G., Hart, T. A., Schneier, F. R., & Leibowitz, M. R. (2001). Attachment in individuals with social anxiety disorder: The
relationship among adult attachment styles, social anxiety, and depression. Emotion, 1, 365-380.
Fang, A., & Hofmann, S. G. (2010). Relationship between social anxiety disorder and body dysmorphic disorder. Clinical Psychology
Review, 30, 1040-1048.
Fava, G. A., Grandi, S., & Canestrari, R. (1989). Treatment of social phobia by homework exposure. Psychotherapy & Psychosomatics, 52,
209-213.
Fedoroff, I. C., & Taylor, S. (2001). Psychological and pharmacological treatments of social phobia: A meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 21, 311-324.
Fehm, L., Pelissolo, A., Furmark, T., & Wittchen, H. U. (2005). Size and burden of social phobia in Europe. European
Neuropsychopharmacology, 15, 453-462.
Feltner, D. E., Liu-Dumaw, M., Schweizer, E., & Bielski, R. (2001). Efficacy of pregabalin in generalized social anxiety disorder: Results of a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, fixed-dose study. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 26, 213-220.
Feske, U., & Chambless, D. L. (1995). Cognitive-behavioural versus exposure only treatment for social phobia: a meta-analysis. Behaviour
Therapy, 26, 695-720.
Furmark, T. (2002). Social phobia: overview of community surveys. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 105(2), 84-93.
Gould, R. A., Buckminster, S., Pollack, M. H., Otto, M. W., & Yap, L. (1997). Cognitive-behavioural and pharmacological treatment for
social phobia: a meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 4, 291-306.


Grant, B. F., Hasin, D. S., Blanco, C., Stinson, F. S., Chou, S. P., Goldstein, R. B.,. (2005). The epidemiology of social anxiety disorder in
the United States: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 66,
1351-1361.
Hackmann, A., Clark, D. M., & McManus, F. (2000). Recurrent images and early memories in social phobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 38, 1183-1192.
Haug, T. T. Blomhoff, S., Hellstrom, K., (2003). Exposure therapy and sertraline in social phobia: 1-Year follow-up of a randomised
controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry; 182, 312-318.
Heimberg, R. G. (1989). Cognitive and behavioural treatments for social phobia: A critical analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 9, 107-
128.
Heimberg, R. G., & Becker, R. E. (2003). Cognitive-behavioural group therapy for social phobia. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy,
33, 147-148.
Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H. R., Safren, S. A., Brown, E. J., Schneier, F. R.,. (1999). Psychometric properties of the Liebowitz
Social Anxiety Scale. Psychological Medicine, 29, 199-212.
Heimberg, R. G., & Juster, H. R. (1995). Cognitive-behavioural treatments: Literature review. In R. G. Heimberg, M. R. Liebowitz, & D. A.
Hope,. (Eds.), Social Phobia: Diagnosis, Assessment, and Treatment (pp. 261-309). New York: Guilford.
Hofmann, S. G. (2000). Self-focused attention before and after treatment of social phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 1123-
1132.
Hofmann, S. G., & DiBartolo, P. M. (2010). Social Anxiety: Clinical, Developmental and Social Perspectives (Second Edition). London:
Elsevier.
Horley, K., Williams, L. M., Gonsalvez, C., & Gordon, E. (2004). Face to face: visual scanpath evidence for abnormal processing of facial
expressions in social phobia. Psychiatric Research, 125, 43-53.


Hwu, H. G., Yeh, E., & Chang, L. Y. (1989). Prevalence of psychiatric disorders in Taiwan defined by the Chinese Diagnostic Interview
Schedule. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 79, 136-147.
Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT). (2011). The IAPT Data Handbook. Guidance on Recording and Monitoring Outcomes
to Support Local Evidence-based Practice (Version 2.0.1). London: NHS. Retrieved from http://www.iapt.nhs.uk/silo/files/iapt-data-
handbook-v2.pdf
Janet, P. (1903). Les obsessions et la psychasthenie. Paris: Alcan.
Jazaieri, H., Goldin, P., Werner, K., Ziv, M., & Gross, J. (2012). A randomized trial of MBSR versus aerobic exercise for social anxiety
disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 68, 715-731.
Kampman, M., Keijsers, G.P.J., Hoogduin, C.A.L., & Hendriks, G. (2008). Outcome prediction of cognitive behaviour therapy for panic
disorder: Initial symptom severity is predictive for treatment outcome, comorbid anxiety or depressive disorder, cluster C personality
disorders and initial motivation are not. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 36, 99-112.
Kasper, S., Stein, D. J., Loft, H., & Nil, R. (2005). Escitalopram in the treatment of social anxiety disorder: Randomised, placebo-controlled,
flexible-dosage study. British Journal of Psychiatry; 186, 222-226.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset
distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the national comorbidity survey replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593-602.
Klein, D. F. (1999). Harmful dysfunction, disorder, disease, illness and evolution. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 421-429.
Koyuncua, A., Ertekinb, E., Binbayc, Z., Özyıldırımd, I., Yükselb, C., & Tükelb, R. (2014). The clinical impact of mood disorder comorbidity
on social anxiety disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 55, 363-369.
Lampe, L., Slade, T., Issakidis, C., & Andrews, G. (2003). Social phobia in the Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being
(NSMHWB). Psychological Medicine, 33, 637-646.


Leichsenring, F., Beutel, M., & Leibing, E. (2007). Psychodynamic psychotherapy for social phobia: A treatment manual based on
supportive-expressive therapy. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 71, 56-83.
Leichsenring, F., Hoyer, J., Beutel, M., Herpertz, S., Hiller, W., Irle, E.,. (2009). The social phobia psychotherapy research network.
The first multicenter randomized controlled trial of psychotherapy for social phobia: Rationale, methods and patient characteristics.
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 78, 35-41.
Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems of Pharmacopsychiatry, 22, 141-173.
Liebowitz, M. R., DeMartinis, N. A., Weihs, K., Londborg, P. D., Smith, W. T., Chung, H., (2003). Efficacy of sertraline in severe generalized
social anxiety disorder: Results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64, 785-792.
Liebowitz, M. R., Heimberg, R. G., Schneier, F. R., Hope, D. A., Davies, S., Holt, C. S., (1999). Cognitive-behavioural group therapy versus
phenelzine in social phobia: long-term outcome. Depression and Anxiety, 10, 89-98.
Lipsitz, J. D., Gur, M., Vermes, D., Petkova, E., Cheng, J., Miller, N.,. (2008). A randomized trial of interpersonal therapy versus supportive
therapy for social anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 542-553.
Lipsitz, J. D., Markowitz, J. C., & Cherry, S. (1997). Manual for Interpersonal Psychotherapy of Social Phobia. New York: Columbia University
College of Physicians.
Malan, D. H. (1976). The Frontier of Brief Psychotherapy. New York: Plenum.
Maner, J. K. (2009). Anxiety: Proximate processes and ultimate functions. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 3, 798-811.
Maner, J. K., & Kenrick, D. K. (2010). When adaptations go awry: Functional and dysfunctional aspects of social anxiety. Social Issues and
Policy Review, 4, 111-142.
Marks, I. M. (1969). Fears and Phobias. London: Heinemann.
Marom, S., Gilboa-Schechtman, E., Aderka, I. M., Weizman, A., & Hermesh, H. (2009). Impact of depression on treatment effectiveness
and gains maintenance in social phobia: A naturalistic study of cognitive behaviour group therapy. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 289-300.


Marzillier, J. S., Lambert, C., & Kellet, J. (1976). A controlled evaluation of systematic desensitization and social skills training for socially
inadequate psychiatric patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 14, 225-238.
Mattick, R. P., & Clarke, J. C. (1998). Development and validation of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear and social interaction anxiety.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 455-470.
McCarthy, O., Hevey, D., Brogan, A., & Kelly, B. D. (2013). Effectiveness of a cognitive behavioural group therapy (CBGT) for social anxiety
disorder: Immediate and long-term benefits. Cognitive Behaviour Therapist, 6(1). doi.org/10.1017/S1754470X13000111
McEvoy, P. M. (2007). Effectiveness of cognitive behavioural group therapy for social phobia in a community clinic: a benchmarking
study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 3030-3040.
McLean, C. P., Asnaani, A., Litz, B. T., & Hofmann, S. G. (2011). Gender differences in anxiety disorders: Prevalence, course of illness,
comorbidity and burden of illness. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45(8), 1027-1035.
McManus, F., Sacadura, C., & Clark, D. M. (2008). Why social anxiety persists: An experimental investigation of the role of safety
behaviours as a maintaining factor. Journal of Behaviour Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 39, 147-161.
McNeil, D. W., Lejuez, C. W., & Sorell, J. T. (2001). Behavioural theories of social phobia: Contributions of basic behavioural principals. In
S. G. Hofmann, & P.M DiBartolo (Eds.), From Social Anxiety to Social Phobia: Multiple Perspectives (pp. 235-253). Needham Heights, MA:
Allyn & Bacon.
Mellings, T., & Alden, L. (2000). Cognitive processes in social anxiety: The effects of self-focus, rumination and anticipatory processing.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 38, 243-257.
Millon, T. (1969). Modern Psychopathology: A Biosocial Approach to Maladaptive Learning and Functioning. Philadelphia, PA: W. B.
Saunders.
Millon, T. (1981). Disorders of Personality. DSM-III: Axis II. Chichester: Wiley.


Mitchell, M. A., & Schmidt, N. B. (2014). General in-situation safety behaviours are uniquely associated with post-event processing.
Journal of Behaviour Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 45, 229-233.
Mohammadi, M. R., Ghanizadeh, A., Mohammadi, M., & Mesgarpour, B. (2006). Prevalence of social phobia and its comorbidity with
psychiatric disorders in Iran. Depression and Anxiety, 23, 405-411.
Morgan, H., & Raffle, C. (1999). Does reducing safety behaviours improve treatment response in patients with social phobia? Australian
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 33, 243-257.
Moscovitch, D. A., Rowa, K., Paulitzki, J. R., Ierullo, M. D., Chiang, B., Antony, M. M., & McCabe, R. E. (2013). Self-portrayal concerns and
their relation to safety behaviours and negative affect in social anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, 476-486.
NICE. (2013). Social Anxiety Disorder: Recognition, Assessment and Treatment. (Clinical Guideline 159). London: Author.
Okajima, I., Kani, Y., Chen, J., & Sakano, Y. (2009). Effects of safety behaviour on the maintenance of anxiety and negative belief social
anxiety disorder. International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 55, 71-81.
O'Sullivan, K., Heavy., D., McManus, S., & McCarthy, O. (2013). Prevalence of social anxiety disorder in an Irish community sample: A
study using internet-based questionnaires. Submitted for publication.
Otto, M. W., Pollack, M. H., Gould, R. A., Worthington, J. J., McArdle, E. T., & Rosenbaum, J. F. (2000). A comparison of the efficacy of
clonazepam and cognitive-behavioural group therapy for the treatment of social phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 14, 345-358.
Pande, A. C., Davidson, J. R., Jefferson, J. W., Janney, C. A., Katzelnick, D. J., Weisler, R.H, (1999). Treatment of social phobia with
gabapentin: A placebo-controlled study. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 19, 341-348.
Perugi, G., Akiskal, H. S., Ramaciotti, S., Nassini, S., Toni, C., Milanfranchi, A., & Musetti, L. (1999). Depressive comorbidity of panic, social
phobic, and obsessive compulsive disorders re-examined: Is there a bipolar II connection? Journal of Psychiatric Research, 33, 53-61.
Perugi, G., Frare, F., Toni, C., Mata, B., & Akiskal, H. S. (2001). Bipolar II and unipolar comorbidity in 153 outpatients with social phobia.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 5, 375-381


Power, M. J., & Brewin, C. R. (Eds.). (1997). The Transformation of Meaning in Psychological Therapies: Integrating Theory and Practice.
Chichester: Wiley.
Rabe-Jablonska, J., Dietrich-Muszalska, A., & Gmitrowicz, A. (2004). The prevalence of social phobia in a representative group of
adolescents from Lodz. Archives of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 6, 15-22.
Regier, D. A., Rae, D. S., Narrow, W. E., Kaelber, C. T., & Schatzberg, A. F. (1998). Prevalence of anxiety disorders and their comorbidity with
mood and addictive disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 24-28.
Rodebaugh, T. L., Holaway, R. M., & Heimberg, R. G. (2004). The treatment of social anxiety disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 883-
908.
Roth, D. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2001). Cognitive-behavioural models of social anxiety disorder. In F. R. Schneier (Ed.), Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, Volume 24, Social anxiety disorder (pp. 753-771). New York: W. B. Saunders.
Ruscio, A. M., Brown, T. A., Chiu, W. T., Sareen, J., Stein, M. B., & Kessler, R. C. (2008). Social fears and social phobia in the USA: Results from
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Psychological Medicine, 38, 15-28.
Saboonchi, F., Lundh, L. G., & Ost, L. G. (1999). Perfectionism and self-consciousness in social phobia and panic disorder with
agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 799-808.
Salkovskis, P. M. (1996). The cognitive approach to anxiety: Threat beliefs, safety-seeking behaviour and the special case of health
anxiety and obsessions. In P. M. Salkovskis (Ed.), Frontiers of Cognitive Therapy (pp. 48-74). New York: Guilford.
Schultz, L. T., & Heimberg, R. G. (2008). Attentional focus in social anxiety disorder: Potential for interactive processes. Clinical
Psychology Review, 28, 1206-1221.
Schuurmans, J., Comijs, H., Emmelkamp, P. M., Weijnen, I. J., van den Hout, M., & van Dyck, R. (2009). Long-term effectiveness
and prediction of treatment outcome in cognitive behavioural therapy and sertraline for late-life anxiety disorders. International
Psychogeriatrics, 21, 1148-1159.


Spurr, J. M., & Stopa, L. (2002). Self-focused attention in social phobia and social anxiety. Clinical Psychology Review, 22, 947-975.
Stangier, U., Heidenreich, T., Peitz, M., Lauterbach, W., & Clark, D. M. (2003). Cognitive therapy for social phobia: individual versus group
treatment. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 991-1007.
Stein, M. B., & Stein, D. J. (2008). Social anxiety disorder. Lancet, 371(9618), 1115-1125.
Stein, M. B., Tancer, M. E., Gelernter, C. S., Vittone, B. J., & Uhde, T. W. (1990). Major depression in patients with social phobia. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 637-639.
Stravynski, A., Arbel, N., Bounader, J., Gaudette, G., Lachance, L., Borgeat, F., (2000). Social phobia treated as a problem in social
functioning: A controlled comparison of two behavioural group approaches. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 102, 188–198.
Taylor, C. T., & Alden, L.E. (2010). Safety behaviours and judgemental biases in social anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
48, 226-237.
Taylor, S. (1996). Meta-analysis of cognitive-behavioural treatments for social phobia. Journal of Behaviour Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 27, 1-9.
Titov, N., Andrews, G., Choi, I., Schwencke, G., & Johnston, L. (2009). Randomized controlled trial of web-based treatment of social phobia
without clinician guidance. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 43, 913-919.
Titov, N., Andrews, G., Choi, I., Schwencke, G., & Mahoney, A. (2008). Shyness 3: Randomized controlled trial of guided versus unguided
Internet-based CBT for social phobia. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 42, 1030-1040.
Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., & Jacob, R. G. (1994). Social phobia: A comparison of behaviour therapy and atenolol. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 62, 350-358.
van Dyck, R. (1996). Non-drug treatment for social phobia. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 11, 65-70.


Wacker, H. R., Müllejans, R., Klein, K. H., & Battegay, R. (1992). Identification of cases of anxiety disorders and affective disorders in the
community according to ICD-10 and DSM-III-R by using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI). International Journal
of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 2, 91-100.
Watanabe, N., Furukawa, T. A., Chen, J., Kinoshita, Y., Nakano, Y., Ogawa, S., & Noda, Y. (2010). Change in quality of life and their
predictors in the long-term follow-up after group cognitive behavioural therapy for social anxiety disorder: A prospective cohort study.
BMC Psychiatry, 10, 81-91.
Wells, A. (1997). Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders. A Practice Manual and Conceptual Guide. Chichester: Wiley.
Wells, A. (1998). Cognitive therapy of social phobia. In N. Tarrier, A. Wells, & G. Haddock (Eds.), Treating Complex Cases (pp. 1-26).
Chichester: Wiley.
Wells, A., Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P., Ludgate, J., Hackman, A., & Gelder, M. G. (1995). Social phobia: The role of in-situation safety
behaviours in maintaining anxiety and negative beliefs. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 26, 153-161.
Wong, J., Gordon, E., & Heimberg, R. (2012). Social anxiety disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based Practice
in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 621-650). Chichester: Wiley.
Woody, S. R., Chambless, D. L., & Glass, C. R. (1997). Self-focused attention in the treatment of social phobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 35, 117-129.
Woody, S. R., & Rodriguez (2000). Self-focused attention and social anxiety in social phobics and normal controls. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 24, 473-488.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1993). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva: Author.
Zahradnik, M., & Stewart, S. (2009). Anxiety disorders and substance use disorders comorbidity. In M. Antony & M. Stein (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders (pp. 565-575). Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Chapter 14 Generalised anxiety disorder
Adrian Wells and Karin Carter
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-14
Case study
Following consultation with her general practitioner for sleep disturbance and a sense of pervasive anxiety, Joan was referred for clinical
assessment with a view to "stress management training." At assessment Joan described that she had difficulty relaxing and constantly had
something to worry about. She described her recent worries as overwhelming. She was presently concerned about physical symptoms, in
particular tingling sensations in her right hand and in her face. Although this was the main worry, she described currently worrying about
not being in a relationship, worrying that she was not being supportive enough to her friends and worrying that she could not cope with
the stress of work. She reported a diffuse and inconsistent set of somatic symptoms including muscle tension, aches and pains in her limbs,
and symptoms of difficulty concentrating, and she described a general feeling of irritability and feeling on edge. Joan traced the onset of the
problem back to leaving college 9 years previously, and was concerned that her lifestyle at that time may have contributed to her problem.


Although she said that she had always had an active mind, her worries had become overwhelming over the past few years. There was no
evidence of substance or alcohol related problems at the time of assessment.
Joan met the diagnostic criteria for generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) with major depressive disorder, following administration of the
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (First et al., 1997). (The criteria for GAD and major depression in DSM-5 are very similar.) Her Beck
Depression Inventory (Beck & Steer, 1987) score was 21, indicating moderate to severe depressive symptoms. She described a recent onset to
her depression and expressed that this was probably a consequence of the impact that anxiety was having on her life. There was no evidence
of suicidality at assessment, although there was some hopelessness concerning her ability to overcome anxiety.
A course of metacognitive therapy (MCT) for GAD based on the metacognitive model (Wells, 1995, 2009) was implemented. During the
course of treatment, the intensity of depressive symptoms was continuously monitored to determine if a further intervention targeted
specifically at these symptoms was required. It was not considered necessary to focus on depression independently at the outset as this was
not leading to significant cognitive or behavioural impairments, did not constitute a risk, and both therapist and patient agreed that it was
probably secondary to GAD.
The course of MCT for GAD involved a total of 10 sessions. Treatment focused on modifying erroneous negative and positive metacognitive
beliefs about worry. In sessions 1 and 2 a case formulation based on the metacognitive model was constructed. Joan was socialised
to the model and work commenced on challenging negative metacognitive beliefs concerning uncontrollability. Homework consisted of
worry-postponement experiments. In sessions 3 and 4 treatment focused on residual uncontrollability beliefs and modification of danger-
related metacognitions. Homework consisted of loss-of-control worry experiments and a mini-survey to challenge negative beliefs about
the abnormality of worry. Sessions 5 and 6 consisted of in-session experiments and verbal re-attribution to challenge specific negative
metacognitions. Homework continued with worry-postponement experiments when necessary, and increased exposure to worry triggers.
Sessions 7 and 8 focused on positive beliefs about worry and challenged them using a combination of verbal methods and the worry contrast


technique in session, and worry modulation experiments for homework. Sessions 9 and 10 focused on assessing and modifying residual
metacognitions and on relapse prevention.
Progress throughout treatment was monitored with self-report measures of worry, including the Anxious Thoughts Inventory (Wells,
1994) and Penn State Worry Questionnaire (Beck et al., 1995); model-specific measures, including the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale;
and symptoms of anxiety (Beck Anxiety Inventory (Beck, 1990)) and depression (Beck Depression Inventory (BDI, Beck & Steer, 1987)).
Ten weekly sessions were completed, at the end of which Joan reported that she was no longer distressed by worry and anxiety. Her sleep
had returned to normal, and although she still experienced intermittent somatic symptoms she did not worry about them. Her mood had
improved (her post-treatment BDI score was 5), and she had accomplished an important therapeutic goal of challenging her erroneous
beliefs about worry and anxiety.

Introduction
GAD is a particularly interesting problem because it is characterised by worry, which is a ubiquitous cognitive activity in psychological
disorders. The techniques developed to treat GAD in metacognitive therapy have provided a basis for developing therapeutic strategies that
have broad application across a wide range of disorders (Wells, 2009).
Worry has been defined as a chain of thoughts associated with negative affect and is difficult to control. It is predominantly verbal rather
than imaginal in content (Borkovec et al., 1983), and aimed at problem solving. Different worry types have been distinguished in GAD.
Type 1 worry refers to worry about non-cognitive events such as finances or physical symptoms, whilst Type 2 worry refers to worry about
one's own thought processes or worry about worry (Wells, 1994, 1995, 2000, 2009). As discussed later, this distinction is a key feature
of the metacognitive model. Unfortunately for the practising clinician, worry is not the only variety of intrusive and difficult-to-control
thinking that occurs in psychological disorders. Worry must be effectively differentiated from other intrusions such as obsessional thoughts


and depressive or obsessional rumination in order to make an accurate diagnosis. Worry has been compared with other types of negative
intrusive thoughts such as obsessions (Turner et al., 1992; Wells & Morrison, 1994) and depressive rumination (Papageorgiou & Wells, 1999,
2004), and was found to have both similarities and differences. One of the key differentiating features diagnostically between worry and
obsessions is that obsessions are egodystonic in nature. Obsessional thoughts are experienced as senseless, abhorrent and uncharacteristic
of the self, whilst worry is not egodystonic (uncharacteristic of self) in this way.
Clinical features
Until the advent of DSM-III-R (APA, 1987) GAD was viewed as a residual diagnostic category and not a disorder in its own right. In DSM-
III-R, GAD was characterised as a disorder of unrealistic and excessive worry about two or more life circumstances for at least 6 months.
When the person is anxious there is a range of at least six symptoms of motor tension, autonomic hyperactivity and/or vigilance. With the
introduction of DSM-IV (APA, 1994), revisions were made to the diagnostic criteria. A new criterion was added, that the individual finds it
difficult to control the worry (criterion B), and the symptoms list was modified such that worry is accompanied by at least three symptoms
from a list including restlessness, being easily fatigued, difficulty concentrating, irritability, muscle tension and disturbed sleep (criterion C).
With the publication of DSM-5 (APA, 2013), there were no substantive revisions to diagnostic criteria for GAD, although the criteria were
reordered. Individuals must identify that the worry is excessive or report distress due to constant worry, and have difficulty controlling
worry, or experience related impairment in social, occupational or other important areas of functioning (criterion D). The disturbance must
not be due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g. drug misuse or medication) or a general medical condition, and not occur
exclusively during a mood disorder, a psychotic disorder or a pervasive developmental disorder (criterion E). A diagnosis is only made if the
focus of the worry is not confined to features of another disorder such as having a panic attack in panic disorder or being embarrassed in

public in social phobia (criterion F). Diagnostic criteria for GAD from the American Psychiatric Association's (2013) DSM-5 and the World
Health Organization's (1992) ICD-10 are given in Table 14.1.
Table 14.1 Diagnostic criteria for generalised anxiety disorder (GAD)
DSM 5
ICD 10
A. Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive
expectation), occurring more days than not for 6
months about a number of events or activities (such as
school or work performance).
B. The person finds it difficult to control the worry.
C. The anxiety or worry is associated with 3 of the
following in adults or 1 of the following in children for
more days than not in the past six months.
1. Restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge
2. Being easily fatigued
3. Difficulty concentrating or mind going blank.
4. Irritability
5. Muscle tension
A. A period of at least six months with prominent tension, worry and
feelings of apprehension, about every-day events and problems.
B. At least four symptoms out of the following list of items must be
present, of which at least one from items (1) to (4). Autonomic
arousal symptoms
1. Palpitations or pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
2. Sweating.
3. Trembling or shaking.
4. Dry mouth (not due to medication or dehydration).
Symptoms concerning chest and abdomen
1. 5. Difficulty breathing.
2. 6. Feeling of choking.
3. 7. Chest pain or discomfort.


6. Sleep disturbance
D. The anxiety or physical symptoms cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, school and other important area of
functioning
E. The disturbance is not due to the direct physiological
effect of a substance.
F. The disturbance is not better explained by another
mental disorder (e.g. anxiety or worry about having
panic attacks in panic disorder).
4. 8. Nausea or abdominal distress (e.g. churning in stomach).
Symptoms concerning brain and mind
1. 9. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, faint or light-headed.
2. 10. Feelings that objects are unreal (derealization), or that one's
self is distant or "not really here" (depersonalization).
3. 11. Fear of losing control, going crazy, or passing out.
4. 12. Fear of dying.
General symptoms
1. 13. Hot flushes or cold chills.
2. 14. Numbness or tingling sensations.
Symptoms of tension
1. 15. Muscle tension or aches and pains.
2. 16. Restlessness and inability to relax.
3. 17. Feeling keyed up, or on edge, or of mental tension.
4. 18. A sensation of a lump in the throat, or difficulty with
swallowing.
Other non-specific symptoms
1. 19. Exaggerated response to minor surprises or being startled.
2. 20. Difficulty in concentrating, or mind going blank, because of
worrying or anxiety.


3. 21. Persistent irritability.
4. 22. Difficulty getting to sleep because of worrying.
C. The disorder does not meet the criteria for panic disorder
phobic anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder or
hypochondriacal disorder.
D. Not sustained by a physical disorder, such as hyperthyroidism,
anorganic mental disorder or psychoactive substance-related
disorder, such as excess consumption of amphetamine-like
substances, or withdrawal from benzodiazepines.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993).
Epidemiology and course
GAD is a common emotional disorder and frequently seen in primary care settings (Burvill, 1990; Goldberg & Lecrubier, 1995; Wittchen et
al., 2002). Large epidemiological studies show that the lifetime prevalence rate of GAD is about 5% with a range of 1-6% (Kessler et al., 2009).
Much of the variation in findings is due to methodological factors. In the US National Comorbidity Replication Study, involving over 9,000
participants, the lifetime prevalence of GAD was 5.7% (Kessler et al., 2005). Compared with men, about twice as many women are diagnosed
with GAD. In the US Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiology Studies, which involved over 20,000 participants, lifetime prevalence rates of

GAD were 7.7% for women and 4.1% for men (McLean et al., 2011). Approximately 12% of patients attending anxiety clinics meet criteria
for GAD.
Based on a review of epidemiological studies, Dugas and Robichaud (2007) proposed that the age of onset for GAD has a bimodal
distribution with peaks occurring in adolescence and then again in later life. GAD runs a chronic, fluctuating course with low remission
rates which are about 15% at 1 year and 25% at 2 years (Yonkers et al., 1996). In community surveys the prevalence rates for GAD among
older adults range from 0.7 to 7.1%, with figures varying depending on case criteria and methodological factors (Stanley & Novy, 2000).
In the US National Comorbidity Replication Study the lifetime prevalence of GAD in cases over 60 was 3.6% (Kessler et al., 2005). Levels of
worry, anxiety and depression in older adults with GAD are similar to those of younger adults (Beck et al., 1995). However, there are some
differences in worry content across the different age groups, with younger individuals reporting more about work and fewer worries about
health compared to older groups (Molina et al., 1998).
Comorbidity
The degree of comorbidity between GAD and other psychiatric disorders is high, with depression and other anxiety disorders being the
most common comorbid conditions (Ouimet et al., 2012). However, the impact of comorbidity on clinical outcomes is no greater in GAD
than in other anxiety disorders (Hunt, 2002). Yonkers et al. (1996) reported that 52% of their GAD sample met criteria for panic disorder or
panic with agoraphobia. Thirty-two percent had social anxiety disorder, and 37% met criteria for major depression. Judd et al. (1998) found
that major depression (62%) and dysthymia (39%) were the most common comorbidities. Whilst the magnitude of these overlaps may
suggest that the DSM classification system may have low integrity, it is possible that this pattern of comorbidity reflects the presence of an
underlying and generic vulnerability to psychopathology.


Research on treatment outcome
Psychological therapies
Psychological treatments for GAD have consisted of a range of different approaches. Behavioural treatments have focused on the control
of anxious symptoms using relaxation methods, and anxiety management approaches have used multicomponent packages combining
relaxation, coping techniques and the challenging of negative thoughts (e.g. Butler et al., 1987, 1991). Relaxation-focused treatments have
tended to use varieties of applied relaxation, which is introduced in stages and culminates in the acquisition of rapid relaxation skills that are
applied in anxiety-provoking situations. Applied relaxation, as described by Ost (1987), and progressive plus applied relaxation (Bernstein &
Borkovec, 1973) have been used alone or as components of multi-element treatment programmes.
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) approaches have focused on challenging negative thoughts following the methods developed by Beck
and associates (Beck et al., 1996). CBT programmes have varied in the types of thoughts targeted. In particular, they have focused on the
most salient danger-related thoughts presented, or more specifically on beliefs centred on intolerance of uncertainty (Dugas & Ladouceur,
2000).
Some treatment approaches have included an exposure component on the conceptual basis that worry may serve as a form of avoidance
of distressing emotions associated with other types of thoughts. Exposure has also been used as a means of practising coping skills. For
instance, Borkovec and colleagues implemented Self-Control Desensitisation (SCD) as part of a treatment package (e.g. Borkovec et al., 2002).
In SCD therapists help clients establish a hierarchy of anxiety-provoking situations ranging from the least to the most threatening. They
then are desensitised to each of these situations starting with the least anxiety-provoking. Following the initial learning of relaxation skills,
SCD involves imagining each anxious situation and physical reactions, worries, thoughts and images that accompany anxiety. Patients are
taught to use their relaxation skills to counteract anxious responses experienced whilst imagining these threatening situations and their


reactions to them. This involves imagining each situation, thought and sensation as if it were occurring and learning how to let go of these
feelings by relaxing the mind and body. During SCD patients are encouraged to use positive self-statements that have been generated in a
coping self-statements part of treatment.
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of empirical evaluations show that CBT is associated with significant clinical improvement, and
treatment gains appear to be maintained at 6- and 12-month follow-up (Cuijpers et al., 2014; Gonçalves & Byrne, 2012; Ouimet et al., 2012).
In one study, there was evidence of maintenance of gains at 2 years (Borkovec et al., 2002). Cognitive-behavioural treatments appear to be
associated with the largest treatment effects when compared with anxiety management, non-directive psychotherapy, or psychoanalytic
psychotherapy (Cuijpers et al., 2014; Durham et al., 1994).
Nevertheless, there is room for improvement in outcomes. In a reanalysis of data from six outcome studies published between 1990
and 1999, Fisher and Durham (1999) applied Jacobsen criteria to define recovery rates. The treatments included CBT, behaviour therapy,
applied relaxation, cognitive therapy plus relaxation, non-directive therapy, analytic psychotherapy, anxiety management training, and
combination treatments. Overall a recovery rate of 40% was found using trait-anxiety as the outcome criterion, with 12 out of 20 treatment
conditions associated with modest recovery rates of 30% or less. The two treatments performing best were individual cognitive therapy and
applied relaxation with recovery rates at 6-month follow-up of 50-60% (Fisher & Durham, 1999). Subsequently, Ost and Breitholz (2000)
showed that applied relaxation and cognitive therapy were both effective treatments with 53% and 62% of patients significantly improved
on some (but not all) measures at post-treatment. Patients showed little improvement in trait-anxiety and worry. Arntz (2003) compared
cognitive therapy with applied relaxation, and at post-treatment the percentage improvement in trait anxiety was only 12.8% following
cognitive therapy and 18.1% following applied relaxation. At post-treatment 35% of cognitive therapy patients and 44% of applied
relaxation patients had recovered. At 6-month follow-up this had increased to 55% of patients receiving cognitive therapy and 53.3% of
those receiving applied relaxation, on the basis of trait-anxiety.


A number of effective CBT approaches have been based on specific models of pathological worry and have involved cognitive therapy
focused on intolerance of uncertainty (Dugas & Ladouceur, 2000) and metacognition (Wells, 1995). Intolerance of uncertainty-based
interventions are efficacious in individual treatment format and recovery rates of approximately 50% have been achieved in group
treatment (Dugas et al., 2003). Treatment outcomes based on the metacognitive model appear to be greater than those obtained with other
CBT approaches. In an uncontrolled trial, Wells and King (2006) obtained large post-treatment effects sizes on measures of trait-anxiety and
worry. In a comparative trial of metacognitive therapy (MCT; Wells, 1997) against applied relaxation, Wells et al. (2010) demonstrated a clear
superiority of MCT. Van der Heiden et al. (2012) compared MCT with intolerance of uncertainty-focused CBT, and found that MCT produced
superior outcomes. MCT also appears effective when delivered in group format. Van der Heiden et al. (2013) obtained 71% recovery rates on
the Penn State Worry Questionnaire (Meyer et al., 1990), with a post-treatment within-subject effects size of d = 1.86. These results show
that enhanced recovery rates can be achieved with MCT.
In summary, individual cognitive-behavioural therapy and applied relaxation appear to be effective treatments for GAD. However, there is
considerable variability in outcomes across studies. To date the best results based on uncontrolled and controlled effect sizes and on formal
recovery rates have been achieved with MCT. The metacognitive therapy approach to treatment will be described later in this chapter.
The UK NICE (2011) guidelines for GAD recommend that within the context of a stepped-care model of service provision, where
individuals with GAD do not respond to low-intensity guided self-help or psychoeducation involving up to five sessions of clinical contact,
if they choose psychological rather than pharmacological treatment they should be offered manualised CBT interventions such as MCT over
12-15 sessions.
Pharmacological treatment
Four drug groups have been shown to provide short-term relief for some GAD symptoms: antidepressants, azapirones, anticonvulsants
and benzodiazepines (Baldwin et al., 2011; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007). However, there are a number of issues and limitations that need to

be considered when evaluating pharmacological approaches. In particular, few studies have used long-term follow-up evaluations of drug
effects, and studies have not tended to assess the impact of treatment on cognitive symptoms of the disorder, namely worry. A further
limitation in assessing studies is that earlier studies were conducted on relatively heterogeneous patient samples with diagnoses such as
"anxiety neurosis" which consist of an undifferentiated number of patients probably meeting present criteria for GAD as defined in DSM-5.
Few studies have so far evaluated combined psychological and pharmacological interventions.
In a meta-analysis of 48 trials, Mitte et al. (2005) found that both azapirones and benzodiazepines were equally effective in the short-
term treatment of GAD. In a systematic review, Roy-Byrne and Cowley (2007) concluded that antidepressants (especially selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs) and azapirones (especially buspirone) were useful short-term drug treatments for GAD, and safer alternatives
to benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines have been associated with increased risk of sedation and dependence (Tyrer, 1990), and they may cause
adverse effects in neonates if used in late pregnancy or whilst breast-feeding (Gale & Oakley-Browne, 2003). Rebound anxiety on withdrawal
of benzodiazepines has been reported in 15-30% of people (Tyrer, 1990). Brawman-Mintzer (2001) and Connor and Davidson (1998) have
recommended gradual tapering of medication and the careful assessment of client suitability before pursuing this treatment.
In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 27 high-quality randomised controlled trials, Baldwin et al. (2011) compared the effectiveness
of nine drugs in the treatment of GAD. There were four SSRIs: sertraline (Lustral), fluoxetine (Prozac), escitalopram (Lexapro) and paroxetine
(Paxil); two serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs): duloxetine (Cymbalta) and venlafaxine (Effexor); two anticonvulsants:
pregabalin (Lyrica) and tiagabine (Gabitril); and one benzodiazepine: lorazepam (Ativan). They concluded that fluoxetine (in terms of
response and remission) and sertraline (in terms of tolerability) seem to have some advantages over other treatments, and among five UK
licensed treatments, duloxetine, escitalopram and pregabalin might offer some advantages over venlafaxine and paroxetine.
The UK NICE (2011) guidelines for GAD recommend that within the context of a stepped-care model of service provision, where
individuals with GAD do not respond to low-intensity guided self-help or psychoeducation involving up to five sessions of clinical contact,
if they choose drug treatment that they first be offered an SSRI, preferably sertraline. If this is ineffective they may be offered an alternative

SSRI or SNRI. If the person cannot tolerate SSRIs or SNRIs, pregabalin is recommended. Benzodiazepines were not recommended for the
treatment of GAD in primary or secondary care except as a short-term measure during crises. Antipsychotics were not recommended for the
treatment of GAD in primary care.
Psychological versus drug treatments, and combination approaches
In a meta-analysis Gould et al. (1997) found that psychological and pharmacological were equally effective in alleviating anxiety symptoms
in patients with GAD post-treatment, but that at follow-up patients who engaged in psychological therapies were more likely to have
maintained treatment gains than those who were treated with medication. This general finding is illustrated by results from the following
two studies.
Lindsay et al. (1987) found that outcomes for CBT, anxiety management and benzodiazepine treatments in patients with GAD were
comparable after treatment and better than a waiting-list control group. However, at 3 months only CBT and anxiety management
treatments maintained this improvement.
Power et al. (1989) compared CBT, benzodiazepine and placebo as treatments for GAD. At post-treatment CBT was superior to the other
two conditions. At 12-month follow-up a smaller proportion of the CBT group (30%) had sought further treatment than the benzodiazepine
(70%) or placebo groups (55%).
Few studies have explored the effects of combining psychological and drug treatments. CBT has been compared with benzodiazepines
over a short time period. Power et al. (1990) compared CBT, benzodiazepines and placebo conditions alone and in combination (CBT plus
benzodiazepine, and CBT plus placebo). CBT alone or in combination was superior to diazepam alone or placebo on most measures at post-
treatment and at 6-month follow-up.
Studies of the effectiveness of combined psychological and pharmacological interventions for GAD can be criticised for their small sample
sizes and short duration. The drug treatments have been typically administered in fixed doses, which may mean that optimum treatments

have not been delivered. The CBT components have differed across studies in their focus and intensity, and none have been based on GAD-
specific models, which were not available at the time.
The metacognitive model of GAD
The metacognitive model (Wells, 1995, 1997, 2000, 2009) offers a detailed account of cognitive and behavioural factors in the development
and persistence of GAD. It is based on the principle that erroneous metacognitive beliefs about worry are a central cognitive factor in
pathological worry.
The metacognitive model is depicted diagrammatically in Figure 14.1. A distinction is made between two types of worry, general worry
(Type 1), which is similar in content to normal worries; and negative thoughts about worry itself (Type 2), or worry about worrying. It is
proposed that normal worries develop into GAD when Type 2 worrying becomes activated in response to worry and its associated anxiety
symptoms. Type 2 worry is the negative interpretation of thinking, a manifestation of underlying negative metacognitive beliefs about
worrying. In GAD these negative metacognitive beliefs centre on two themes: (1) beliefs about the uncontrollability of worry and (2) beliefs
about the dangerous consequences of worrying for mental, physical and/or social functioning.
Aside from negative metacognitive beliefs, the model holds that individuals with GAD also have positive metacognitive beliefs about
worrying. In particular, they believe that worrying is a helpful coping strategy and that it provides a means of anticipating and avoiding or
effectively dealing with potential threats in the future. Beliefs of this kind support sustained Type 1 worry as a means of coping, in which
individuals use worry to "work through" problems until they feel able to cope. In the model, positive beliefs are thought to be normal and
give rise to the sustained Type 1 worry that most people have from time to time. However, it is the development and/or activation of negative
metacognitive beliefs and resulting Type 2 worry that leads to GAD.


Trigger
Positive meta-beliefs activated
(Strategy selection)
Type 1 worry
Negative meta-beliefs activated
Type 2 worry
(Meta-worry)
Behaviour
Thought control
Emotion


Figure 14.1 The metacognitive model of GAD
Note: Reproduced with kind permission from Wells, A. (1997). Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders: A Practice Manual and Conceptual Guide. Chichester:
Wiley.
Having introduced some basic concepts, we now turn to describing the cognitive-behavioural responses as they occur in a typical
distressing episode of worry. Referring to Figure 14.1, episodes of pathological worry are often triggered by an intrusive thought, which can
be an image or a verbal "what if..." question that has negative implications. For example, a patient described a recent worry episode in which
her partner was late arriving home from work and while listening to the radio she heard news about a gas explosion. This was accompanied
by a mental image of her husband lying injured in his car. On a different occasion the patient reported that she read in the newspaper that a
pupil in a local school had contracted meningitis. This was followed by the intrusive thought, "What if my son caught meningitis?" In each
case a negative intrusion acted as the internal trigger for the worry episode that followed. The trigger primes positive metacognitive beliefs
about worrying, which support the use of a worry as a mean of contemplating a series of negative outcomes and how to deal with them.
This Type 1 worrying normally continues until it is displaced by external factors such as competing demands, or until the person reaches an
internal state that signals it is safe to stop worrying. This state is often a sense of knowing that most necessary options have been covered, or
an internal "feeling" that one will be able to cope. However, the individual with GAD activates negative beliefs about worrying and negatively
appraises worry and its associated responses during the worry episode. For example, the person thinks that loss of mental control and a
mental breakdown is imminent. This leads to an intensification of anxiety depicted by the feedback cycle between Type 2 worry and anxiety
in Figure 14.1. It also means that it is more difficult to obtain a sense that one will be able to cope.
As shown in Figure 14.1, Type 1 worrying can lead to an intensification of anxiety (at least initially), but as the work of Type 1 worry is
accomplished anxiety can decrease. These processes are depicted by the dotted line linking Type 1 worry to emotion. A further process is also
important in the model. Since worrying is predominantly a verbal conceptual activity that focuses on danger, it may block other processes


necessary for emotional processing and the resolution of stress and other emotional reactions. Hence in Figure 14.1, rather than anxiety
alone being represented, the model captures this important factor by specifying a link with "emotion." What this means for GAD is that
the use of Type 1 worry may lead to an increase of other symptoms such as intrusive thoughts as symptoms of failed emotional processing
following stress. This could in turn strengthen negative beliefs about coping and negative beliefs about the controllability and functioning
of one's thinking.
Two other factors contribute to the development and persistence of GAD in the model. These are labelled as "behaviours" and "thought
control" in Figure 14.1. Since people with GAD have disparate beliefs about worry (believing it is helpful but also uncontrollable or
dangerous), this leads to unhelpful vacillations in mental control attempts. Individuals will try not to think about topics that may
trigger worrying or may try to suppress certain internal triggers. However, once a trigger is experienced the person will activate positive
beliefs about the need to worry in order to cope. Thus, there are conflicting motivations to avoid the trigger but to engage the worry if
the trigger is encountered. The problem here is that suppression of triggers is not consistently effective and this ineffectiveness can be
interpreted as evidence of loss of control, thereby strengthening negative metacognitive beliefs. Even when suppression is effective there
is a problem in that individuals fail to discover that worrying does not lead to catastrophic outcomes such as mental breakdown. The
conflicting motivations to disrupt worry once it is activated means that the individual rarely has experiences of discontinuing their worry
episode, which would provide evidence of control (but if successful would not provide evidence that worry is harmless). The individual
therefore becomes trapped in the use of a pattern of unhelpful thought control strategies that maintain dysfunctional beliefs about the
uncontrollability and/or dangerous consequences of worry.
Overt behaviours are also often used to avoid worry and the threat it carries. For example, an individual will seek reassurance from
others that there is really nothing to worry about, or seek information to determine that situations are safe and do not necessitate
worry. Subtle forms of avoidance are also evident, such as avoiding news items or people that may lead to internal triggers. Problems
with behavioural strategies are that some of them increase uncertainty/ambiguity, as is the case when different people offer different or


conflicting information. Seeking reassurance transfers the control of worry to other people and so the person with GAD fails to challenge
metacognitions about lack of personal control. Searching for information as a means of trying to determine that it is not necessary to
worry often provides access to a wider range of negative information activating "what if..." questions. Avoidance of situations deprives the
individual of opportunities to discover that worry is controllable or that worry is not harmful.
A brief review of empirical support for the metacognitive model
Evidence from several sources is supportive of central components of the MCT model (Wells, 2009). These studies have explored worry in
non-patients with high levels of pathological worry like that characteristic of worry in GAD, in non-patients meeting diagnostic criteria for
GAD, and patients with GAD.
Borkovec and Roemer (1995) conducted two studies exploring the reasons given for worrying by students, and showed that motivation,
preparation and avoidance were the most characteristic reasons given. Individuals meeting criteria for GAD rated using worry for
"distraction from more upsetting things" significantly more than non-anxious subjects. Assuming that these reasons reflect positive
attitudes or beliefs about worry, these results provide preliminary support for the idea that individuals with problematic worry view worry
in positive terms.
More direct evidence for the model and the idea that relationships exist between metacognitive beliefs and worrying comes from studies
by Cartwright-Hatton and Wells (1997). We developed the metacognitions questionnaire (MCQ) to measure a range of metacognitive
dimensions including positive and negative beliefs about worry and intrusive thoughts. Both positive and negative beliefs about worrying
were positively associated with worry in students. Moreover, proneness to pathological worry remained positively associated with positive
beliefs about worry, and negative beliefs about worry when trait-anxiety and other metacognitive factors were controlled. In a study of
patients with DSM-III-R GAD, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), patients with other anxiety or depressive disorders, and non-patients,


no differences emerged in positive beliefs about worry. However, GAD and OCD patients endorsed significantly higher negative beliefs
concerning uncontrollability and danger than the other groups.
In a later study, Wells and Papageorgiou (1998) tested the metacognitive predictors of pathological worry and obsessive-compulsive
symptoms whilst controlling for the statistical interdependency of these variables. Both positive beliefs about worry and negative beliefs
concerning uncontrollability and danger were independently associated with pathological worry, and negative beliefs made the strongest
contribution.
In order to test the model in the context of DSM-IV GAD, which includes uncontrollability of worry as a diagnostic criterion, Wells (2005)
developed the meta-worry questionnaire to assess danger-related appraisals of worry whilst eliminating circularity that would otherwise
be caused by retaining uncontrollability appraisals. Negative danger-related appraisals of worry were positively correlated with pathological
worry, and ratings were significantly higher in students meeting criteria for DSM-IV GAD, compared with individuals with somatic anxiety
or no anxiety.
Earlier studies of the relationships between Type 1 and Type 2 worry and pathological worry used the Anxious Thought Inventory (AnTI;
Wells, 1994) to assess Type 1 and 2 dimensions. Wells and Carter (1999) found that Type 1 and Type 2 worry were positively correlated
with pathological worry and a rating of "how much is worry a problem for you?" in non-patients. However, only Type 2 worry and not Type
1 remained as a significant positive predictor of pathological worry when trait-anxiety and overlaps between worry types were statistically
controlled. These relationships remained even when the rated uncontrollability of worry was also controlled in subsequent analyses. These
results show that irrespective of the frequency of Type 1 worries as measured by the AnTI, and of the uncontrollability of worry, Type 2
worry is significantly associated with pathological worry.
In a later study Wells and Carter (2001) compared patients with a diagnosis of DSM-III-R GAD, with patients with panic disorder, social
phobia, depression or non-patient controls, on measures of Type 2 worry and metacognitive beliefs. Patients with GAD showed significantly
higher negative metacognitive belief and Type 2 worry scores than the other groups. In a discriminant function analysis, patients with GAD

were significantly discriminated from the other groups in terms of negative metacognitions, whilst the content of Type 1 worry was the best
discriminator of patients with panic or social phobia.
In a prospective study, Nassif (1999) examined the presence of GAD at time 1 and again at a second time 12-15 weeks later in a sample of
students. The level of negative metacognitive beliefs assessed at time 1 was a significant predictor of the presence of GAD at time 2 when the
presence of GAD at time 1 was controlled. These results are consistent with a causal role of negative metacognitions in the development of
GAD symptoms.
The model suggests that positive and negative beliefs about worry give rise to conflicting motivations and strategies in regulating
negative thinking. A study by Purdon (2000) demonstrated that during a worry episode positive and negative beliefs about worry predicted
conflicting motivations to engage in or control worrying thoughts.
Finally, in this section the consequences of worry for emotional regulation will be considered. The model gives rise to the hypothesis
that worrying can under some circumstances cause problems for effective self-regulation. In particular, worrying as a strategy to deal with
stress may interfere with processes necessary for effective emotional processing. Symptoms of failed emotional processing include intrusive
thoughts, arousal, and clinically, post-traumatic stress disorder. In one study Butler et al. (1995) found that brief periods of worry following
exposure to a gruesome film were associated with a significantly higher frequency of intrusive images about the film over a subsequent
3-day period compared to brief periods of imagery or "settling down." These findings were substantiated and extended in a further study
by Wells and Papageorgiou (1995). The Thought Control Questionnaire (TCQ; Wells & Davies, 1994) has been used to explore relationships
between the tendency to use worry as a means of coping with distressing thoughts and emotional outcomes. The use of worry as a strategy
is positively associated with acute stress disorder and other anxiety disorders (e.g. Warda & Bryant, 1998). In a prospective study Holeva
et al. (2001) demonstrated that the tendency to use worry in the first few weeks after being a victim in a road traffic accident (irrespective
of stress symptoms) was associated with a greater incidence of subsequent post-traumatic stress disorder. Similarly, recent studies have
confirmed positive relationships between the use of worry as a means of dealing with negative thoughts and the severity of stress symptoms

both cross-sectionally (Roussis & Wells, 2006) and prospectively, even when overlap with worry as a symptom is controlled (Roussis & Wells,
2008).
Assessment of GAD and worry
Two structured interview schedules are useful in the identification and diagnosis of GAD: the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV
(SCID; First et al., 1997), and the Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule (ADIS; DiNardo et al., 1994).
The Generalized Anxiety Disorder Questionnaire (GAD-Q; Roemer et al., 1995) is a self-report instrument for the identification of GAD
that can be scored in accordance with DSM-III-R or DSM-IV criteria. The instrument has been used to identify GAD cases in research on non-
patient samples.
Self-report measures of worry used in clinical and research settings are the Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ; Meyer et al., 1990) and
the Anxious Thoughts Inventory (AnTI; Wells, 1994). The PSWQ is a 16-item non-content-based trait measure of the tendency to experience
frequent, chronic and difficult-to-control worry. The AnTI is a 22-item trait scale assessing both content and process dimensions of worry.
There are three subscales which measure social worry, health worry and meta-worry.
The Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GADS: Wells, 1997) and a revised version (GADS-R: Wells, 2009) have been used in the context
of implementing MCT for GAD. It provides a multicomponent measure of the distress associated with worry, use of coping behaviours,
avoidance and maladaptive metacognitive beliefs about worry in the past week. It provides basic information that can be useful in
developing a case formulation, and provides an index of the effects of treatment on individual mechanisms central in the formulation. The
measure is normally administered at the beginning of each treatment session as a guide to treatment effects and as a means of reducing
therapist drift by highlighting target metacognitive beliefs that remain above zero.


In addition to these measures of worry, therapists should use additional measures of anxiety symptoms and mood. We recommend and
use the following instruments that are administered at each treatment session: the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI; Beck et al., 1988) and the
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck et al., 1961) or the Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI-II; Beck & Steer, 1987). At pre-treatment and post
treatment additional measures are administered and include the trait-anxiety subscale of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Spielberger et
al., 1983), PSWQ and AnTI.
Metacognitive therapy (MCT) for GAD
In the remainder of this chapter MCT for GAD will be described and the content of treatment outlined in sufficient detail to serve as an
introduction to this treatment approach. For more detail the reader is referred to two references that serve as treatment guides: Wells (1997,
chap. 8) and Wells (2009, chap. 6).
This section will be illustrated with reference to the case study presented at the beginning of this chapter. Treatment sessions are typically
administered once a week for a period of 12 weeks. However, it is common for treatment to be successfully completed in a range of 6-
12 sessions, and the number of sessions provided depends of the speed of therapeutic progress. The therapist should consider terminating
treatment when the patient consistently shows no conviction in negative and positive beliefs about worry on the GADS and when relapse
prevention strategies have been reviewed in therapy and the therapy blueprint is complete. Treatment focuses on modifying negative beliefs
about the uncontrollability of worry first, then negative beliefs about the danger of worry, and finally positive beliefs about worry.
Formulation and treatment
Treatment begins with case conceptualisation comprising the construction of an idiosyncratic version of Figure 14.1. This is achieved by
asking patients about a recent worry episode or exacerbation of worry in which they were distressed by the worry. Questioning about the

episode should aim to elicit the triggering thought for worry, anxious symptoms and negative beliefs about worry. Type 2 worry is typically
the situational readout of negative beliefs, and so the theme in Type 2 worry should mirror negative beliefs. A useful line of questioning
is to ask about the content of Type 1 worry, then ask about the anxiety symptoms associated with this, and then question the patient
about negative thoughts about the anxiety symptoms and worry process itself. In questioning patients the therapist should determine
negative beliefs about uncontrollability and negative beliefs about danger. The uncontrollability beliefs are always present even if implicit
in what the patient says. For instance, patients often state that worry is harmful physically or psychologically. In these circumstances the
therapist should question why under such circumstances the patient does not simply stop worrying. This is a direct means of accessing the
underlying uncontrollability belief. In order to determine positive beliefs about worry, the therapist asks about the advantages of worrying.
It is important to note that positive beliefs may not be as evident as negative beliefs at the outset of treatment. This is not a problem since
treatment focuses initially on challenging negative beliefs about worry. The following example illustrates the line of questioning described
earlier leading to the case formulation in Figure 14.2
Therapist (T): Thinking about the last time you had a distressing worry episode, what triggered your worry, a thought, or an image, in a
situation?
Patient (P): I was worried about meeting up with my friends and started to think about what I should do when I go out in case I do
something to upset them.
T: So what was the first thing that triggered that worry, was it a thought like "what if I do something wrong?"
P: Yes, I had the thought, "what if I act badly?"
T: OK. Then you started worrying.
P: Yes, I was running through what could happen and how I might behave.
T: It sounds as if you were worrying about acting badly. How did you feel as you thought about those things?
P: Terrible, I started to get tense and felt on edge all the time.

T: Did you notice any physical symptoms?
P: I noticed tingling sensations in my hands and face, although I think I have that most of the time now.
T: You mentioned before that sleep disturbance is also a problem, as is concentration. Is that due to worry?
P: I think so, it's certainly worse when I'm worried.
T: OK. I'll include that in our model too. When you felt anxious on that occasion did you have any negative thoughts about the way you
were feeling?
P: I didn't want to feel like this anymore.
T: Did you think anything bad would happen if you continued to worry and feel like that?
P: I thought I could make myself ill.
T: What do you mean?
P: If I continued to worry I could go crazy or something.
T: Why then don't you stop yourself from worrying?
P: I can't. It's uncontrollable.
T: So you've mentioned two beliefs that you have about worry. You believe it's uncontrollable, and you believe it could lead you to go crazy.
P: Yes I'm sure it can, it's not natural to worry so much.
T: Do you ever worry that you may have damaged yourself already with worry?
P: Yes, I think that, maybe it has damaged my mind or body.
T: Do you think there are any advantages to worrying?
P: It helps me to be prepared to deal with problems in the future.
T So it sounds like you have some positive beliefs about worry too.


Trigger
(e.g. meeting friends)
What if I act badly

Positive beliefs
Worrying helps me save face
If I worry I can avoid problems
Worrying means I'll be prepared

Type I
Worry about meeting friends and
how to behave in different
circumstances

Negative beliefs
Worrying is uncontrollable
Worrying will damage my mind
I will damage my body with worry

Type 2
I'm losing control
I'm going crazy
What if I've damaged myself

Behaviour
Get reassurance
Avoid going out
Take herbal
medication
Try to relax

Thought control
Try not to think about things
that trigger worry
If I start worrying, continue
with it

Anxious
Sleep disturbance
Tingling in hands/face
Muscle tension/aches
Concentration problems
Feeling 'on edge'


Figure 14.2 An idiosyncratic case conceptualisation based on the metacognitive model

To determine the nature of clients' behaviours and thought control strategies the therapist asks a series of questions. Some of the initial probe questions that we have found helpful include the following.

Questions about thought control
•	When you were worrying, did you do anything to control it? What was that?
•	Do you ever try not to think about something in case it triggers worrying?
•	When you start worrying, do you need to think it through in order to be OK?
•	When you're in the midst of a worry, have you ever decided just to discontinue it?

Questions about behaviour
•	Do you avoid situations in order to prevent yourself from worrying?
•	Do you rely on other people to stop you worrying (e.g. by asking for reassurance)?
•	Do you avoid or search for information in order to prevent worrying?
•	Do you do anything to prevent worry and anxiety from harming you?
•	Do you do anything to try and relax?

Socialisation
Socialisation to the MCT model consists of sharing the case formulation with the patient. The therapist proceeds by describing the key

elements in the formulation. The central messages to convey are that most people experience worry and that worry only becomes a problem
when unhelpful beliefs develop about worry and associated behaviour. The role of beliefs is illustrated by therapist-directed questions, for
example:
• If you thought that worrying was only a good thing to do, that it helped you to survive, how much of a problem would worry be?
• If you knew that worrying could be controlled, how much of a problem would you have with worry?
The therapist also helps the patient to see how using unhelpful thought control strategies can lead to further problems such as
strengthening beliefs about the uncontrollability of worry. This is achieved by questioning patients about how effective their strategies have
been to date, and by use of a thought-suppression experiment (e.g. the therapist asks the patient to try not to think about a blue elephant for
a period of 3 minutes). Discussion following the suppression experiment focuses on how effective this was. If it was not effective, and this is
typical, then it is evidence of how trying not to think thoughts is counterproductive. If, less typically it was effective, this can be used a basis
to explore why the patient cannot be this effective with worry.
Challenging metacognitive beliefs
Uncontrollability
The first step is challenging metacognitive beliefs about uncontrollability. Initially verbal methods are used to explore and weaken these
beliefs. Useful questions include:
• If worrying is uncontrollable, how does it ever stop?
• What happens to your worry if suddenly the telephone rings and you have to answer it?

• Have you ever tried to postpone worry until another time?
The therapist obtains a rating in belief about uncontrollability on a scale from 0 to 100 at the beginning and throughout this procedure
of re-attribution. After challenging the belief verbally, a worry postponement experiment is introduced as a means of testing beliefs in
uncontrollability as a homework assignment. The therapist introduces this as follows:
One of the problems is that you are in two minds about worry. You believe you should engage with it in order to cope, but also that it is
uncontrollable and dangerous. So you oscillate between attempting to avoid worry but not interrupting it once it starts. This means you
cannot find out the truth about worry. I would like you to try an experiment for homework. When you notice yourself worrying I would like
you to say to yourself, "Stop, I'm worrying again. I won't complete this now. I'll do it later." I would then like you to set aside 15 minutes at the
end of the day, say between 6 p.m. and 6.15 p.m. when you can sit down and work through your worry. But you don't need to use that time if
by then you don't feel the need and in fact, most people find that they don't use it.
At this stage the therapist is careful to point out the difference between thought suppression and worry postponement:
I don't want you to confuse this technique with the idea of trying not to think a thought. I'm not asking you to use the blue elephant strategy.
You may have a worry, such as worry about your physical health, and that thought can stay in your mind, you are not trying to blank it out.
You are deciding to postpone any further more detailed thinking about it. Can you see the difference?
One strategy for illustrating different ways of reacting to thoughts is to introduce an experiential exercise of detached mindfulness in the
session. Detached mindfulness (DM; Wells & Matthews, 1994) is a state of being aware of a thought and standing back without responding
to it (this does not require meditation). The therapist can introduce this with metaphors such as: "If the telephone rings must you answer
it? So, if you have a trigger thought such as, 'what if I have an accident,' must you answer?" This is followed by an exercise such as the free-

association task (Wells, 2009), in which the therapist asks the patient to listen to a series of words and passively watch what happens in the
mind without controlling thoughts. Once this has been accomplished the therapist suggests that the patient should use DM to respond to
worry triggers, that is, to step back and postpone any kind of response, especially worry.
In the next session the results of the experiment are discussed and belief in uncontrollability re-rated. The therapist then introduces
further discussion of the evidence and counter-evidence for the belief that worry is uncontrollable and then introduces the "loss of control
experiment." This is conducted in session and subsequently applied as a modified postponed worry experiment for homework. An example
of the therapist dialogue for the loss of control experiment is:
I'd like you to try an experiment right now. We have reviewed evidence that worry is not uncontrollable, and you have started to believe that
you do have some control. But it is important to put this to the test. I'd like to try and push the limits of worry, to see if you can lose control of
the activity. Can you think of a worry that you have had in the last week or that you are having at the present time? I would like you to start
worrying about that, worry as much as you can, really go for it, and see if you can lose control of the activity.
Following this exercise, beliefs in uncontrollability should be re-rated. Some patients find the experiment unhelpful and disqualify the
exercise by stating that it was not a real or significant worry. This is to be expected, but this is the first stage of the procedure; the more
powerful stages are to follow. Next the patient is asked to run the experiment for homework, which consists of continuing with worry
postponement but using the allotted postponed worry time to try and lose control of the worry experienced earlier in the day. Once this has
been practised a couple of times, the patient is encouraged to try and lose control of worry during a naturally occurring worry episode rather
than postponing the activity.
Danger-related metacognitions
Once belief in uncontrollability is at zero, treatment focuses on modifying metacognitive beliefs concerning the dangers of worrying. The

three broad classes of danger are: physical (e.g. worrying can damage my body), psychological (e.g. worrying can make me lose my mind) and
social (e.g. worrying is abnormal and will lead people to reject me). Often in appraising the harmful effects of worry, patients equate worry
with stress, and because they have been led to believe stress is harmful, they assume worry must also be harmful. Later we will see how
strategies of questioning the mechanism for worry effects, education and decoupling can be used to deal with this issue.
The Dissonance Technique
Initial weakening of metacognitions concerning danger (or positive beliefs - it can go either way) can be obtained by emphasising the
dissonance that exists between the patient's negative and positive beliefs about worry. Here the therapist aims to show how believing that
worrying is a helpful coping strategy conflicts with negative beliefs about worry. The patient is then invited to accept either the positive or
negative belief or to revise beliefs to make them more parsimonious. The following transcript illustrates this process:
Therapist (T): On the one hand you believe that worry helps you be prepared, yet on the other you think it could cause mental breakdown,
is that right?
Patient (P): Yes, well stress is a bad thing for health, and I know worry gives me symptoms.
T: So you are in two minds about worry. But how can worry help you be prepared if it can also make you lose your mind. Isn't there a
conflict in what you believe?
P: Yes, I'd not thought of it that way before, maybe worry isn't so good after all then.
T: Or maybe worry isn't harmful.
P: I'd like to think that, but I'm sure it's not good.
T: Ok, so it sounds as if you are beginning to doubt how good worry is.
P: Yes, I suppose so.


T: We will come back to positive beliefs later in therapy. Right now though, how much do you believe worry could cause a mental
breakdown?
P: I'm sure it could, I believe it 60%.
T: Let's take a look at that belief in more detail.
Five Verbal Techniques for Challenging Danger Metacognitions
Five overlapping techniques will be considered here, which we will refer to as: (1) questioning the evidence, (2) questioning the mechanism
plus education, (3) questioning the normality of worry, (4) reviewing counter-evidence and (5) decoupling. The aim is not to obtain a
definitive challenge to the patient's negative belief with every question, but to apply the questions and techniques fluidly.
Questioning the evidence The following are examples of enquiries that may be made to help patients question the evidence for their beliefs
about the effects of worry.
• What is the evidence that you have that worry causes (e.g. physical illness)?
• How long have you been a worrier... why hasn't the problem (e.g. going crazy) happened yet?
The evidence that the patient has to support the view that worry is dangerous should be explored. This exploration can provide entry
points for reframing experiences and modifying knowledge by education and the strategies that are described later. The type of evidence
frequently cited is that worry causes bodily symptoms, that stress is thought to be harmful, and that someone known to the patient had a
"nervous breakdown" and that person was a worrier. In each case it is useful to question how the patient knows that it is worry that causes
these events. Perhaps it is some third factor that causes both worry and these events, or some of these events may cause worry (i.e. bodily
symptoms may cause worry, harmful events may cause worry).


The patient should be asked why it is, given the length of time they have been worrying, that negative consequences have not yet occurred.
This is an unpredictable strategy, but interesting nonetheless, because some patients state that a catastrophe has happened already and that
is why they are seeking treatment. This type of response can be dealt with by bringing the patient back to the main belief that was the focus
of evaluation at the outset. It is useful to help the patient to see that they are seeking treatment for worry, which is unpleasant, but this does
not in itself mean that worry causes more serious problems.
Questioning the mechanism plus education The following are examples of enquiries that may be made to help patients question their beliefs
about the mechanism through which worry has negative effects.
• What is the mechanism that leads worry to have this effect?
• How does worry do that?
The mechanism by which worry has negative personal consequences should be questioned. Patients vary in their knowledge of
mechanisms that they believe underlie the harmful effects of worrying. For some, worry is equated with anxiety or stress and is therefore
seen as negative. Others believe that worry has specific effects such as raising blood pressure, which in turn is damaging. Answers to this
question can be corrected, through psychoeducation, by providing new information about the effects of stress and worry. For example,
concerns about raised blood pressure can be allayed by asking the patient what their blood pressure is. If it is normal, this provides evidence
that despite worrying there is no effect on this dimension. A distinction can also be made between periodically elevated blood pressure
related to worry and the chronically elevated type associated with poor health outcomes. Stress and anxiety experiences can be reframed in
terms of the flight and fight survival response and patients can be helped to see how anxiety has survival value. The therapist can ask the
question:

• Is it likely that humankind would have evolved from stressful early environments if worry and stress caused death, illness or mental
breakdown?
Some patients believe that worry puts a strain on the heart and could lead to a heart attack. Here the therapist should explore if the patient
knows what is done to restart a heart following a heart attack. One procedure is the injection of adrenaline into the heart muscle and it is
adrenaline that is released when anxious and worried. This scenario is used to show how worry/stress effects on physiology are not harmful.
Questioning the normality of worry The following are examples of enquiries that may be made to help patients question their beliefs about
the link between worry and severe adverse outcomes.
• How many people would you estimate worry in your street?
• And how many have had a mental breakdown?
By questioning the pervasiveness of worry, it is possible to follow up with questions concerning the distribution of negative outcomes to
show that there is significantly more worry than feared outcomes. In addition the therapist can present evidence that worry is a normal
activity that most people engage in. This procedure should be followed up with a mini-survey to assess the prevalence and nature of worry.
Mini-surveys are described later.
Reviewing the counter-evidence The following is an example of an enquiry that may be made to help patients challenge their belief that
worry always leads to severe adverse outcomes.
• Can you think of evidence that worry is not harmful?

This strategy is best placed after some of those reviewed earlier as a means of consolidating the new information learned as a result of
those procedures. Typically the therapist will be required to help the patient generate a list of counter-evidence such as the following:
• Worry is normal and most people have it.
• Worry and stress are not the same thing.
• Worry is a component of anxiety and anxiety can have survival value.
• I have been a worrier for years and nothing bad has happened.
• I know other people who worry more than me and they are OK.
• People in worrying situations don't go crazy due to worry (e.g. people in war).
• I've tried to lose control of my mind with worry and I found I couldn't.
• My doctor says that my blood pressure is normal.
Decoupling For some patients worry is treated as synonymous with stress or synonymous with mental illness. It is necessary to decouple
these concepts to challenge danger-related metacognitions. One way that we have found useful to decouple the worry and stress concept is
to view stress as a cause of demands on the individual whilst worry can be seen as a response to stress. This is generally consistent with the
patient's positive worry beliefs in which worry is seen as a coping strategy, therefore it is not synonymous with stress.
The issue of equating worry with mental illness can be more problematic to deal with. Some patients view their need for treatment as
evidence that they are already mentally abnormal. To deal with this we have found it beneficial to equate GAD with specific phobias such as
a spider phobia. One way to look at GAD is as a specific fear of worrying because of the belief that something bad will happen if a big worry
is encountered. This is very much like having a fear of spiders because of the belief that something bad will happen if exposed to one. The
patient can then be asked if they would consider a spider phobia to be a mental illness, to which the typical response is "no." Another useful

strategy is to ask the patient to describe what they mean by mental illness, and list the attributes/symptoms of such in collaboration with the
therapist. The symptoms can then be compared against those accompanying GAD with the aim of showing a discrepancy suggesting that
mental illness and GAD are not equivalent.
Behavioural Experiments
Various experiments involving the manipulation of worry can be used to challenge belief in danger-related metacognitions. The use of
verbal procedures described earlier should be followed by the running of behavioural experiments as a means of unambiguously testing
predictions concerning the dangerous consequences of worrying. In-session experiments consist of asking patients to engage in a period
of intense worry to determine if it culminates in a predicted negative outcome. The validity of such experiments can be increased by
introducing strategies that combine exposure to bodily symptoms with intense worry. For example, one patient predicted that worrying
would put his mind under stress and he would lose touch with reality. In order to test this we asked him to worry intensely, but he reported
that this wasn't a good test because he didn't have the feeling that things around him were unreal. We decided to induce the feelings of
unreality by asking him to stare at his reflection in a mirror and once the feeling occurred to engage in intense worrying to see if this
made it worse. To his surprise he discovered that as he worried the feeling of unreality decreased. The experiment was repeated using
hyperventilation to induce perceptual disturbances, and this was combined with intense worry. The patient discovered that worrying had
no effect on these symptoms.
Experiments of this kind are consolidated through homework assignments in which patients are asked to practise escalating their
worrying in situ when worry episodes actually occur, in order to test negative predictions.
For some patients, a key belief concerns the negative social consequences of worrying, such that it may lead to rejection. Experiments can
be devised in which the patient is encouraged to disclose to other people, such as friends or colleagues, that they have been worrying whilst

observing the reactions obtained. Before doing so, the therapist and patient work together to establish the type of reaction that would be
expected if revealing signs of worry lead to rejection. The occurrence of these reactions can then be objectively assessed.
Mini-Surveys
Mini-surveys can offer an effective means of normalising worry and providing a basis for challenging negative beliefs about its dangerous
consequences. The patient is asked to briefly question approximately five people about their own experience of worry. Questions pertinent to
the patient's negative beliefs can be incorporated in the interview. For example, a patient believed that worrying was abnormal and that her
worry was more serious than other people's. She asked the following questions of her friends and husband:
• How often do you worry?
• Do you ever find it difficult to control your worry?
• Do you ever think that you worry too much about things?
She discovered that everyone she interviewed said that they worried, had difficulty controlling worry, and most of the people interviewed
said that they sometimes worried too much. To her surprise she found that one person whom she assumed was not a worrier actually
worried more than she did herself. When asked what conclusions she drew from this exercise she stated: "Worry is normal then, and actually
my worry isn't much different from anyone else's."
Modifying positive metacognitive beliefs
In the last third of treatment attention shifts to focusing on modifying positive beliefs about worry as a means of setting the foundations for
increased flexibility in cognitive strategies for dealing with threat.

The range and strength of positive beliefs varies across cases, and these are tackled using verbal re-attribution methods involving (1)
questioning the evidence, (2) reviewing the counter-evidence, (3) use of the mismatch technique and (4) worry modulation experiments.
Questioning the evidence and reviewing counter-evidence needs little further discussion as these techniques were described previously to
challenge negative beliefs about worry.
Mismatch technique
The mismatch technique (Wells, 1997) consists of asking a patient to write out a detailed summary of a recent worry narrative. The
events in the narrative are then compared with the events that actually happened in the worried-about situation. This strategy can be
performed retrospectively for a situation that has been encountered or prospectively for a situation that has been avoided or has not yet
been encountered. In this latter case the worry narrative is written and then the patient enters the situation and a narrative of what actually
transpires in the situation is then written. The worry narrative is then compared against the factual narrative and the mismatch between
them is emphasised. In this way the patient can be helped to see how worrying distorts reality, and as such cannot provide an effective means
of anticipating and coping with real events.
Worry modulation
Worry modulation experiments (Wells, 1997) involve asking patients to engage in activities normally associated with worrying whilst
deliberately increasing and then decreasing the intensity of worry. If the patient's prediction concerning the benefits of worry are correct,
then it should be possible to detect evidence of better performance or coping on the occasions when worry was increased, and a decline in
performance when it was decreased. Patients typically discover that, contrary to predictions, performance is unaltered, or it actually feels
easier under no-worry conditions.


Strategy shifts
In the last couple of sessions of treatment, the therapist introduces alternative strategies for dealing with and thinking about threat. Since
many patients have been worriers for most of their lives, there can be a degree of inflexibility or rigidity in styles of processing. The therapist
introduces the notion that it is possible to think about threats or distressing events in different ways. One strategy is to encourage patient
to use different endings for "what if ..." related negative thoughts and other negative intrusions when they occur. For example, patients
can be asked to practise finishing out intrusions with positive images instead of engaging the normal verbal catastrophising process of
Type 1 worry. Any reluctance to do this can be indicative of residual or undetected metacognitive beliefs that should be targeted prior
to termination of treatment. For instance, some patients hold superstitious-like beliefs about the dangers of thinking positively. Some
alternative strategies have already been practised during the course of treatment; one of these is to make a decision not to engage in worry or
extended analysis on a topic in response to intrusions.
Relapse prevention
In the last two sessions, relapse prevention focuses on reviewing level of belief in metacognitions (worries about the worrying process) and
determining if there is residual avoidance of situations that might trigger worrying. Evidence of remaining problems in these areas requires
that the therapist revisit them in order to further modify belief level and avoidance.
The therapist works in collaboration with the patient to write a summary of the information learned during treatment. This summary
forms the basis of the therapy blueprint that the patient can use for reference in the future. The blueprint consists of a copy of the
formulation, a description of the factors maintaining GAD, and a listing of the main negative and positive worry beliefs. The evidence
counteracting each belief is documented, and a summary of alternative strategies for dealing with worrying thoughts is written out as a
series of alternative plans.

Applying metacognitive therapy to other disorders
The approach to GAD described here is grounded in a general metacognitive theory of the maintenance and treatment of psychological
disorders. GAD involves some of the core basic psychological processes and factors that are conceptualised as underpinning most forms
of psychopathology and emotional vulnerability. The techniques and conceptual framework described here have also been adapted and
applied in conceptualising and treating post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and depression, and in developing a
brief treatment of social anxiety disorder (Wells, 2000; Wells & Papageorgiou, 2001, 2004; Wells & Sembi, 2004; Wells et al., 2015). In a meta-
analysis of MCT, the treatment approach was found to be more effective than control conditions and CBT with large between-group effect
sizes (Normann et al., 2014).
Summary
GAD is a chronic and lifelong condition if untreated. It is one of the most common anxiety disorders. It is of special interest as a
potential marker for basic pathological processes associated with psychological vulnerability. The disorder has proven to be difficult to treat
effectively with traditional cognitive-behavioural interventions, producing at best approximately 50-60% recovery rates. Pharmacological
approaches also appear to be effective, but relapse appears to be a problem following discontinuation of medication, and some treatments
run the risk of significant side effects, particularly dependency with benzodiazepines. Few studies have evaluated the impact of
psychological or drug treatments on the worry component of the disorder, which prevents conclusions being drawn about the effects of
treatments on a central and arguably the most important feature of the disorder.
The metacognitive model of GAD provides the most comprehensive model supported by an empirical literature, and provides a means
of conceptualising and treating cases that improves clinical outcomes. This treatment approach is relatively new and evaluations of its

effects are in their early stages. The model itself is based on the principle that maladaptive metacognitive beliefs and the consequences of
behavioural regulation of thoughts lead to the development and persistence of GAD. Of particular importance are erroneous negative beliefs
about worry in the areas of uncontrollability and danger/consequences of the activity.
MCT based on the model follows a sequence that can be implemented within 12 weekly sessions. A range of strategies have been developed
which may be applied to modifying maladaptive negative and positive metacognitive beliefs, and unhelpful coping behaviours.
MCT has applications outside the realm of treating GAD, and offers the possibility that metacognitive treatment techniques may be
effectively applied to problems of repetitive, persistent and difficult-to-control thinking processes across a range of disorders.
Exercises
Using the case example of Joan presented earlier and Figure 14.2, divide into groups of three and assign roles of clinical psychologist, client
and observer. Role-play the following, alternating roles after each one:

1. Socialising Joan into the MCT model and communicating the ideas that worry is normal and that the problem in GAD lies in certain
positive and negative beliefs held about worry.
2. Challenging Joan's uncontrollability metacognitive beliefs about worry, including some gentle questioning of these beliefs, working
through a thought-suppression experiment and agreeing on a worry-postponement homework task.
3. Challenging Joan's danger-related metacognitive beliefs about worry, by focusing on the dissonance between her positive and negative
beliefs about worry, and two of the five verbal techniques for challenging danger-related metacognitions outlined in the text:
questioning the evidence, questioning the mechanism plus education, questioning the normality of worry, reviewing the counter-
evidence and decoupling.


4. Challenging Joan's danger-related metacognitive beliefs about worry by working collaboratively with her to design a relevant
behavioural experiment. Take a record of Joan's predictions before the experiment.
5. Challenging Joan's positive metacognitive beliefs about worry with two of the verbal attribution strategies outlined in the text:
questioning the evidence, reviewing the counter-evidence, using the mismatch technique and worry modulation experiments.
Further reading for practitioners
Andrews, G., Creamer, M., Crino, R., Hunt, C., Lampe, L., & Page, A. (2003). The Treatment of Anxiety Disorders. Clinician's Guides and
Patient Manuals (Second Edition, Chapters 20-23). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wells, A. (1997). Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders: A Practice Manual and Conceptual Guide. Chichester: Wiley.
Wells, A. (2009). Metacognitive Therapy for Anxiety and Depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Evidence summaries
Barlow, D. Allen, L., & Basden, E. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for panic disorders, phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder. In P.
Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments that Work (Third Edition, pp. 351-394). New York: Oxford University Press.
Cuijpers, P., Sijbrandij, M., Koole, S., Huibers, M., Berking, M., & Andersson, G. (2014). Psychological treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 34(2), 130-140.
Gonçalves, D. C., & Byrne, G. J. (2012). Interventions for generalized anxiety disorder in older adults: Systematic review and meta-
analysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26(1), 1-11.


Ouimet, A., Covin, R., & Dozois, D. (2012). Generalized anxiety disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based
Practice in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 651–680). Chichester: Wiley.
Roy-Byrne, P., & Cowley, D. (2007). Pharmacological treatments of panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia and social
anxiety disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 395–430). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Assessment instruments
Beck, A. (1990). Beck Anxiety Inventory. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1987). Manual for the Revised Beck Depression Inventory. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Cartwright-Hatton, S., & Wells, A. (1997). Beliefs about worry and intrusions: The meta-cognitions questionnaire and its correlates.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11(3), 279–296.
DiNardo, P., Brown, T., & Barlow (1994). Anxiety Disorder Interview Schedule for DSM IV. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J.B.W. (1997). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders-Patient Edition
(SCID-I/P, Version 2.0, 4/97 Revision). New York: Biometrics Research Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Lovibund, P., & Lovibund, S. (1995). The structure of negative emotional states: Comparison of the Depression and Anxiety Stress Scales
(DASS) with the Beck Anxiety and Depression Inventories. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33, 335–343.
Marks, I., & Matthew, A. (1979). Brief standard self-rating for phobic patients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 17, 263–267. Contains the
Fear Questionnaire.


Meyer, T., Miller, M., Metzger, R., & Borkovec, T. (1990). Development and validation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 28, 487–495.
Roemer, L., Borkovec, M., Rosa, P., & Borkovec, T. D. (1995). A self-diagnostic measure of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Behaviour
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 26, 345–350.
Snaith, R., Baugh, S., Clayden, A., Hussain, A., & Sipple, M. (1982). The Clinical Anxiety Scale: An instrument derived from the Hamilton
Anxiety Scale. British Journal of Psychiatry, 141, 518–523.
Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R. L., Lushene, R., Vagg, P. R., & Jacobs, G. A. (1983). Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychology Press.
Wells, A. (1994). A multidimensional measure of worry. Development and preliminary validation of the Anxious Thoughts Inventory.
Anxiety Stress and Coping, 6, 289–299.
Wells, A., & Cartwright-Hatton, S. (2004). A short form of the metacognitions questionnaire: properties of the MCQ-30. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 42, 385–396.
Zung, W. (1971). A rating instrument for anxiety disorders. Psychosomatics, 12, 371–379.
Further reading for clients
Barlow, D., & Rapee, R. (2014). 10 Steps to Mastering Stress: A Lifestyle Approach (Updated Edition). New York: Oxford University Press.
Bourne, E. (2015). The Anxiety and Phobia Workbook (Sixth Edition). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Meares, K., & Freeston, M. (2008). Overcoming Worry: A Self-Help Guide Using Cognitive Behavioural Techniques. London: Constable &
Robinson.

References
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1987). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised (DSM-III-
R). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition, DSM-IV).
Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Arntz, A. (2003). Cognitive therapy versus applied relaxation as treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 41, 633-646.
Baldwin, D., Woods, R., Lawson, R., & Taylor, D. (2011). Efficacy of drug treatments for generalised anxiety disorder: Systematic review
and meta-analysis. British Medical Journal, 342, d1199.
Beck, A. (1990). Beck Anxiety Inventory. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., Emery, G., & Greenberg, R. L. (1996). Cognitive therapy for evaluation anxieties. In C. G. Lindemann (Ed.), Handbook of the
Treatment of the Anxiety Disorders (Second Edition, pp. 235-260). Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Beck, A. T., Epstein, N., Brown, G., & Steer, R. A. (1988). An inventory for measuring clinical anxiety: Psychometric properties. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 893-897.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. A. (1987). Manual for the Revised Beck Depression Inventory. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J., & Erbaugh, J. (1961). An inventory for measuring depression. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 4, 561-571.


Beck, J. G., Stanley, M. A., & Zebb, B. J. (1995). Psychometric properties of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire in older adults. Journal of
Clinical Geropsychology, 1, 33-42.
Bernstein, D. A., & Borkovec, T. D. (1973). Progressive Relaxation Training. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Borkovec, T. D., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., & Lytle, R. (2002). A component analysis of cognitive-behavioural therapy for generalized
anxiety disorder and the role of interpersonal problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 288-298.
Borkovec, T. D., Robinson, E., Pruzinsky, T., & DePree, J. A. (1983). Preliminary exploration of worry: Some characteristics and processes.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 21, 9-16.
Borkovec, T. D., & Roemer, L. (1995). Perceived functions of worry among generalized anxiety disorder subjects: Distraction from more
emotionally distressing topics? Behaviour Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 26, 25-30.
Brawman-Mintzer, O. (2001). Pharmacologic treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. In O. Brawman-Mintzer (Ed.), The Psychiatric
Clinics of North America: Generalized Anxiety Disorder (Volume 24, Number 1, pp. 119-137). Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders.
Burvill, P. W. (1990). The epidemiology of psychological disorders in general medical settings. In N. Sartorius, D. Goldberg, G. De
Girolamo, E. Costa, J. Silva, Y. Lecrubier, & H. U. Wittchen (Eds.), Psychological Disorders in General Medical Settings. Toronto, Canada:
Hogrefe & Huber.
Butler, G., Cullington, A., Hibbert, G., Klimes, I., & Gelder, M. (1987). Anxiety management for persistent generalized anxiety disorder.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 535-542.
Butler, G., Fennell, M., Robson, P., & Gelder, M. (1991). Comparison of behaviour therapy and cognitive behaviour therapy in the
treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59, 167-175.
Butler, G., Wells, A., & Dewick, H. (1995). Differential effects of worry and imagery after exposure to a stressful stimulus: A pilot study.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23, 45-56.


Cartwright-Hatton, S., & Wells, A. (1997). Beliefs about worry and intrusions: The metacognitions questionnaire and its correlates.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11, 279-296.
Connor, K. M., & Davidson, J.R.T. (1998). Biology and drug therapy of GAD. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 1286-1294.
Cuijpers, P., Sijbrandij, M., Koole, S., Huibers, M., Berking, M., & Andersson, G. (2014). Psychological treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 34, 130-140.
DiNardo, P., Brown, T., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). Anxiety Disorder Interview Schedule for DSM-IV. San Antonio, TX: Psychological
Corporation.
Dugas, M. J., & Ladouceur, R. (2000). Treatment of generalized anxiety disorder targeting intolerance of uncertainty in two types of
worry. Behaviour Modification, 24, 635-657.
Dugas, M. J., Ladouceur, R., Léger, E., Freeston, M. H., Langlois, F., Provencher, M. D.. (2003). Group cognitive-behavioural therapy for
generalized anxiety disorder: treatment outcome and long-term follow-up. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 821-825.
Dugas, M. J., & Robichaud, M. (2007). Cognitive Behavioural Treatment for Generalized Anxiety Disorder. From Science to Practice. New York:
Routledge.
Durham, R. C., Murphy, T., Allan, T., Rochard, K., Treliving, L. R., & Fenton, G. W. (1994). Cognitive therapy, analytic psychotherapy and
anxiety management for generalized anxiety disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 315-323.
First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J.B.W. (1997). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders-Patient Edition
(SCID-I/P, Version 2.0, 4/97 Revision). New York: Biometrics Research Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute.
Fisher, P. L., & Durham, R. C. (1999). Recovery rates in generalized anxiety following psychological therapy: an analysis of clinical
significant change in the STAI-T across outcome studies since 1990. Psychological Medicine, 29, 1425-1434.
Gale, C., & Oakley-Browne, M. (2003). Generalised anxiety disorder. Clinical Evidence, 10, 1-18.


Goldberg, D. P., & Lecrubier, Y. (1995). Form and frequency of mental disorders across centres. In T. B. Ustun & N. Sartorius (Eds.), Mental
Illness in General Health care: An International Study (pp. 323-334). New York: Wiley.
Gonçalves, D. C., & Byrne, G. J. (2012). Interventions for generalized anxiety disorder in older adults: Systematic review and meta-
analysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26, 1-11.
Gould, R. A., Otto, M. W., Pollack, M. H., & Yap, L. (1997). Cognitive behavioural and pharmacological treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder: A preliminary meta-analysis. Behaviour Therapy, 28, 285-305.
Holeva, V., Tarrier, N., & Wells, A. (2001). Prevalence and predictors of acute stress disorder and PTSD following road traffic accidents:
Thought control strategies and social support. Behaviour Therapy, 32, 65-84.
Hunt, C. J. (2002). The current status of the diagnostic validity and treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 15, 157-162.
Judd, L. L., Kessler, R. C., & Paulus, M. P. (1998). Comorbidity as a fundamental feature of generalized anxiety disorders: Results from the
National Comorbidity Survey (NCS). Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 393, 6-11.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset
distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the national comorbidity survey replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593-602.
Kessler, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Wittchen, H. (2009). Epidemiology of anxiety disorders. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford
handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 19-33). New York: Oxford University Press.
Lindsay, W. R., Gamsu, C. V., McLaughlin, E., (1987). A controlled trial of treatments for generalized anxiety. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 26, 3–15.
McLean, C. P., Asnaani, A., Litz, B. T., & Hofmann, S. G. (2011). Gender differences in anxiety disorders: Prevalence, course of illness,
comorbidity and burden of illness. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45, 1027-1035.


Meyer, T., Miller, M., Metzger, R., & Borkovec, T. (1990). Development and validation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 28, 487-495.
Mitte, K., Noack, P., Steil, R., & Hautzinger, M. (2005). A meta-analytic review of the efficacy of drug treatment in generalized anxiety
disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 25(2), 141-150.
Molina, S., Borkovec, T. D., Peasley, C., & Person, D. (1998). Content analysis of worrisome streams of consciousness in anxious and
dysphoric participants Cognitive Therapy & Research, 22, 109-123.
Nassif, Y. (1999). Predictors of Pathological Worry. Unpublished M.Phil. Thesis, University of Manchester, UK.
NICE. (2011). Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Panic Disorder, with and Without Agoraphobia. Management in Primary, Secondary and
Community Care (Clinical Guideline 113). London: Author.
Normann, N., van Emmerik, A., & Morina, N. (2014). The efficacy of metacognitive therapy for anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic
review. Depression and Anxiety, 31, 402-211.
Ost, L. (1987). Applied relaxation: Description of a coping technique and review of controlled studies. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
25, 397-409.
Ost, L., & Breitholz, E. (2000). Applied relaxation versus cognitive therapy in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 38, 777-790.
Ouimet, A., Covin, R., & Dozois, D. (2012). Generalized anxiety disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based
Practice in Clinical Psychology. Adult Disorders (pp. 651-680). Chichester: Wiley.
Papageorgiou, C., & Wells, A. (1999). Process and meta-cognitive dimensions of depressive and anxious thoughts and relationships with
emotional intensity. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 6, 156-162.
Papageorgiou, C., & Wells, A. (2004). Nature, functions and beliefs about depressive rumination. In C. Papageorgiou & A. Wells (Eds.),
Depressive Rumination: Nature, Theory and Treatment (pp. 3-20). Chichester: Wiley.


Power, K. G., Jerrom, D.W.A., Simpson, R. J., Mitchell, M. J., & Swanson, V. (1989). A controlled comparison of cognitive behaviour therapy,
diazepam and placebo in the management of generalised anxiety. Behavioural Psychotherapy, 17, 1–14.
Power, K. G., Simpson, R. J., Swanson, V., & Wallace, B. (1990). A controlled comparison of cognitive-behaviour therapy, diazepam and
placebo, alone and in combination, for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 4, 267-292.
Purdon, C. (2000). Metacognition and the Persistence of Worry. Paper presented at the annual conference of the British Association of
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, Institute of Education, London, UK.
Roemer, L., Borkovec, M., Rosa, P., & Borkovec, T. D. (1995). (GAD-Q) A self-diagnostic measure of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of
Behaviour Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 26, 345-350.
Roussis, P., & Wells, A. (2006). Post-traumatic stress symptoms: Tests of relationships with thought control strategies and beliefs as
predicted by the metacognitive model. Personality and Individual Differences, 40, 111-122.
Roussis, P., & Wells, A. (2008). Psychological factors predicting stress symptoms: Metacognition, thought control and varieties of worry.
Anxiety, Stress and Coping, 21, 213-225.
Roy-Byrne, P., & Cowley, D. (2007). Pharmacological treatments of panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia and social
anxiety disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments that Work (Third Edition, pp. 395-430). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R. L., Lushene, R., Vagg, P. R., & Jacobs, G. A. (1983). Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychology Press.
Stanley, M. A., & Novy, D. M. (2000). Cognitive-behaviour therapy for generalized anxiety in late life: An evaluative overview. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders. Special Issue: Anxiety in the elderly, 14, 191-207.
Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., & Stanley, M. A. (1992). Are obsessional thoughts and worry different cognitive phenomena? Clinical
Psychology Review, 12, 257-270.


Tyrer, P. (1990). Current problems with benzodiazepines. In: D. Wheatly (Eds.), The anxiolytic jungle: where next? (pp. 23-47). Chichester:
Wiley.
Van der Heiden, C., Melchior, K., & de Stigler, E. (2013). The effectiveness of group metacognitive therapy for generalised anxiety
disorder: A pilot study. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 43, 151-157.
Van der Heiden, C., Muris, P., & Van der Molen, H. T. (2012). Randomized controlled trial on the effectiveness of metacognitive therapy
and intolerance-of-uncertainty therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 100-109.
Warda, G., & Bryant, R. A. (1998). Thought control strategies in acute stress disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 1171-1175.
Wells, A. (1994). A multidimensional measure of worry: Development and preliminary validation of the Anxious Thoughts Inventory.
Anxiety, Stress and Coping, 6, 289-299.
Wells, A. (1995). Metacognition and worry: A cognitive model of generalized anxiety disorder. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy,
23, 301-320.
Wells, A. (1997). Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders: A Practice Manual and Conceptual Guide. Chichester: Wiley.
Wells, A. (2000). Emotional Disorders and Metacognition: Innovative Cognitive Therapy. Chichester: Wiley.
Wells, A. (2005). The metacognitive model of GAD: Assessment of meta-worry and relationship with DSM-IV generalized anxiety
disorder. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 29, 107–121.
Wells, A. (2009). Metacognitive Therapy for Anxiety and Depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Wells, A., & Carter, K. (1999). Preliminary tests of a cognitive model of GAD. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 585-594.
Wells, A., & Carter, K. (2001). Further tests of a cognitive model of generalized anxiety disorder: Metacognitions and worry in GAD, panic
disorder, social phobia, depression and non-patients. Behaviour Therapy, 32, 85-102.
Wells, A., & Davies, M. (1994). The Thought Control Questionnaire: A measure of individual differences in the control of unwanted
thoughts. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 871-878.


Wells, A., & King, P. (2006). Metacognitive therapy for generalized anxiety disorder: An open trial. Journal of Behaviour Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 37, 206-212.
Wells, A., & Matthews, G. (1994). Attention and Emotion. A Clinical Perspective. Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Wells, A., & Morrison, T. (1994). Qualitative dimensions of normal worry and normal intrusive thoughts: A comparative study. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 32, 867-870.
Wells, A., & Papageorgiou, C. (1995). Worry and the incubation of intrusive images following stress. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33,
579-583.
Wells, A., & Papageorgiou, C. (1998). Relationships between worry, obsessive-compulsive symptoms, and metacognitive beliefs.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 899-913.
Wells, A., & Papageorgiou, C. (2001). Brief cognitive therapy of social phobia: a case series. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 713-720.
Wells, A., & Papageorgiou, C. (2004). Metacognitive therapy for depressive rumination. In C. Papageorgiou & A. Wells (Eds.), Depressive
Rumination: Nature, Theory and Treatment (pp. 259-274). Chichester: Wiley.
Wells, A., & Sembi, S. (2004). Metacognitive therapy for PTSD: A preliminary investigation of a new brief treatment. Journal of Behaviour
Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 35(4), 307-318.
Wells, A., Walton, D., Lovell, K., & Proctor, D. (2015). Metacognitive therapy versus prolonged exposure in adults with chronic post-
traumatic stress disorder: A parallel randomized controlled trial. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 39, 70-80.
Wells, A., Welford, M., King, P., Papageorgiou, C., Wisely, J., & Mendel, E. (2010). A pilot randomized trial of metacognitive therapy vs.
applied relaxation in the treatment of adults with generalized anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 429-434.
Wittchen, H.-U., Kessler, R. C., Beesdo, K., Krause, P., Hoefler, M., & Hoyer, J. (2002). Generalized anxiety and depression in primary
care: Prevalence, recognition, and management. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. Special Issue: Generalized Anxiety Disorder: New Trends in
Diagnosis, Management, and Treatment, 63(Suppl. 8), 24-34.


World Health Organization. (1993). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva: Author.
Yonkers, K. A., Warshaw, M. G., Massion, A. O., & Keller, M. B. (1996). Phenomenology and course of generalized anxiety disorder. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 308-313.


Chapter 15 Panic disorder and agoraphobia
Steven Taylor and Gordon J. G. Asmundson
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-15
Case vignette
Lisa was a 23-year-old undergraduate science student who presented to student counselling services because of recurrent panic attacks. The
first attack occurred about 3 months ago, in the midst of a stressful series of university exams. She had been quite anxious about the exams
and had been staying up late studying. Lisa had also been drinking a lot of coffee. Her first attack occurred the morning before the first of
her exams. She suddenly felt queasy and light-headed and her surroundings seemed vaguely unreal. She broke into a cold sweat and her
heart pounded like a hammer in her chest. Lisa thought she was about to die. Twenty minutes later the attack passed, leaving Lisa weak and
exhausted. She attributed the attack to stress, lack of sleep, and too much coffee. Accordingly, she cut down on coffee and tried to get more
rest.
Two weeks later Lisa's exams were over. But she continued to have panic attacks, regardless of whether she was feeling stressed or drinking
coffee. Lisa started having panic attacks in supermarkets, while travelling on crowded trains, and in crowded bars. Each time she felt dizzy,

her heart pounded wildly, her surroundings seemed unreal and she thought she was going to die. The panic attacks were truly terrifying,
and so Lisa started avoiding situations in which the attacks seemed likely to occur. Twice she went to the hospital emergency department
for help. Each time the attending physician gave her a physical examination but could find nothing wrong. Lisa was told that the attacks
were due to stress and that she should try to relax. She was also given a small supply of 1 mg tablets of lorazepam, which she was told to take
whenever she felt panicky. Lisa took the tablets but continued to worry a great deal about her panics. "Why," she thought to herself, "should
I be panicking when I'm not feeling stressed?" At times Lisa worried that she might have a fatal brain disease - possibly "mad cow" disease.
Lisa feared she might suddenly drop dead from the disease.
Introduction
In the case example which opened this chapter, Lisa presented with symptoms of both panic disorder characterised by recurrent panic
attacks, and agoraphobia characterised by a fear of venturing out into those situations where panic attacks previously occurred. These
conditions sometimes, but not always, occur together. In ICD-10 (WHO, 2013) and DSM-5 (APA, 2013), panic disorder and agoraphobia are
separate diagnoses. The way panic disorder and agoraphobia are conceptualised in DSM-5 marks a change from DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000),
where panic disorder with agoraphobia was defined as a single disorder. Other differences between DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 are described
in detail elsewhere (Asmundson, LeBouthillier et al., 2014; Asmundson, Taylor et al., 2014). These include the addition of criteria and
guidelines for distinguishing agoraphobia from specific phobia, the addition of a 6-month duration requirement for agoraphobia, the
addition of panic attacks as a specifier to any DSM-5 diagnosis, changes to descriptors of panic attack types, as well as various changes to the
descriptive text for these disorders. In this chapter we discuss clinical features of panic disorder and agoraphobia, conceptual models, and
assessment and treatment strategies based on the current evidence.


Clinical features and classification
Panic attacks and panic disorder
Panic disorder is characterised by recurrent, unexpected panic attacks (APA, 2013, WHO, 1993). Table 15.1 lists the defining features of these
attacks. The panic attacks can be either full-blown (i.e. having four or more of the symptoms in Table 15.1) or they may be limited symptom
panics (three or fewer symptoms).
Table 15.1 Panic attack: definition and criteria
DSM-5
ICD-10
A panic attack is an abrupt surge (from a calm or
anxious state) of intense fear or intense discomfort
that reaches a peak within minutes, and during
which time four (or more) of the following
symptoms occur:
1. Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated
heart rate
2. Sweating
3. Trembling or shaking
A. Recurrent panic attacks, that are not consistently associated with a
specific situation or object, and often occurring spontaneously (i.e. the
episodes are unpredictable). The panic attacks are not associated with
marked exertion or with exposure to dangerous or life-threatening
situations.
B. A panic attack is characterized by all of the following:
a. it is a discrete episode of intense fear or discomfort;
b. it starts abruptly;


4. Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering
5. Feeling of choking
6. Chest pain or discomfort
7. Nausea or abdominal distress
8. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-headed, or faint
9. Chills or heat sensations
10. Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations)
11. Derealisation (feelings of unreality) or
depersonalisation (being detached from oneself)
12. Fear of losing control or "going crazy"
13. Fear of dying
c. it reaches a crescendo within a few minutes and lasts at least some
minutes;
d. at least four symptoms must be present from the list below, one of
which must be from items (1) to (4): Autonomic arousal symptoms
1. Palpitations or pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
2. Sweating.
3. Trembling or shaking.
4. Dry mouth (not due to medication or dehydration).
Symptoms concerning chest and abdomen
1. 5. Difficulty breathing.
2. 6. Feeling of choking.
3. 7. Chest pain or discomfort.
4. 8. Nausea or abdominal distress (e.g. churning in stomach).
Symptoms concerning brain and mind
1. 9. Feeling dizzy, unsteady, faint or light-headed.
2. 10. Feelings that objects are unreal (derealization), or that one's
self is distant or "not really here" (depersonalization).
3. 11. Fear of losing control, going crazy, or passing out.
4. 12. Fear of dying.General symptoms
5. 13. Hot flushes or cold chills.

6. 14. Numbness or tingling sensations.
C. Most commonly used exclusion criteria: not due to a physical disorder,
organic mental disorder, or other mental disorders such as schizophrenia
and related disorders, affective disorders or somatoform disorders.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993, pp. 94-95).
To diagnose panic disorder, at least one of the full-blown attacks must be followed by a month or more of either (1) persistent concern or
worry about having more attacks or about the consequences of the attacks or (2) significant behavioural changes as a result of the attacks
(e.g. avoidance of work or school activities). The attacks must not stem solely from the direct effects of illicit substance use, medication or a
general medical condition (e.g. hyperthyroidism, vestibular dysfunction) and should not be better explained by another mental disorder (e.g.
such as social phobia for panic attacks that occur solely in social situations).
Panic subtypes
The panic attacks found in panic disorder should be distinguished from panic reactions that are triggered by exposure to actual life-
threatening situations (e.g. panicking when you notice a poisonous spider crawling up your arm). Panic disorder is defined by panics that
occur in the absence of real danger. There are two types of panic attacks seen in panic disorder (and, less commonly, in other anxiety
disorders):
• Unexpected panics. These are not associated with a trigger that the person can identify; these attacks seem to come "out of the blue."


• Expected panics. These are panics in which there is an obvious trigger or cue, such as situations in which panics typically occur.
Notice that Lisa, the patient described in the opening vignette, suffered from unexpected and expected panics. The vignette describes full-
blown panics, although it is likely that she also had milder, limited symptom attacks.
Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia is characterised by anxiety about being in places or situations from which escape might be difficult (or embarrassing) or in
which help may not be available in the event of having a panic attack or panic-like symptoms (e.g. fear of having a sudden attack of dizziness
or a sudden attack of diarrhoea (APA, 2013). Agoraphobia often develops as a consequence of panic attacks or panic-like symptoms, but
may also precede panic disorder (APA, 2013; Ballenger & Fyer, 1996). In DSM-5, panic disorder and agoraphobia are regarded as separate
but related disorders. People diagnosed with agoraphobia must experience symptoms of fear or anxiety in at least two different situations,
including using public transportation, being in open spaces, being in enclosed spaces, standing in line or being in a crowd, or being outside
of the home alone. Often the person is better able to endure these situations when with a trusted companion such as a parent or spouse.
Consistent with other phobias, the DSM-5 suggests symptoms of agoraphobia must last at least 6 months. However, this criterion is flexible
and is meant to guide clinical judgement in ruling out transient fears. It is noteworthy that a diagnosis of agoraphobia does not preclude a
diagnosis of panic disorder. Therefore, individuals who present with symptoms consistent with agoraphobia and panic disorder should be
given both diagnoses. The case in our opening vignette, Lisa, was diagnosed as having panic disorder and agoraphobia.
Epidemiology
Prevalence, onset and course


The lifetime prevalence rates for unexpected panic attacks in the general population is between 4% and 12% whereas the lifetime prevalence
estimate for any panic attack, whether expected or unexpected, is 28% (Kessler et al., 2006). Most epidemiological studies suggest that
the lifetime prevalence of panic disorder is 1-7% (Grant et al., 2006; Kessler et al., 2006, 2012). Agoraphobia has a lifetime prevalence of
approximately 2-4%. While the majority of epidemiological and community data indicate that agoraphobia rarely occurs without a history
of panic attacks, panic-like features, or panic disorder (Grant et al., 2006, Kessler et al., 2006, 2012; Wittchen et al., 2008), some data indicate
that agoraphobia without panic attacks or panic disorder is quite common (Faravelli et al., 2009). Weissman et al. (1997) have demonstrated
that, despite some minor variation, lifetime prevalence rates are generally consistent around the world.
The median age of onset for panic disorder is 20-24 years (APA, 2013). Women are diagnosed with panic disorder more than twice as often
as men (Weissman et al., 1997) and panic-disordered men are more likely to try to "self-medicate" by misusing alcohol (Yonkers et al., 1998).
Panic disorder may wax and wane over time, but if left untreated, the typical course is chronic (APA, 2013).
Comorbidity
Panic disorder and agoraphobia are commonly comorbid with other anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, trauma-
and stress-related disorders, mood disorders, somatoform and pain-related disorders, substance use disorders (particularly alcohol abuse
and dependence) and personality disorders. One explanation of high comorbidity between panic disorder and other anxiety and mood
disorders is that they share a common diathesis. Another possible explanation is that one disorder is a consequence of the other. For
example, a person might become demoralised and depressed in response to debilitating panic attacks. Some people may misuse alcohol or
drugs in an attempt to cope with panic.
Hypochondriasis (excessive health anxiety) has been diagnosed in approximately 20% of panic disorder patients attending general
medical clinics, and in almost 50% of those attending anxiety disorders clinics (Noyes, 2001). Acute and chronic musculoskeletal pain
is reported, respectively, by about 85% and 40% of panic disorder patients attending anxiety disorders clinics (Asmundson et al., 2000).


Irritable bowel syndrome, a condition characterised by persistent abdominal pain and defecation difficulties, co-occurs in 17-41% of
treatment-seeking panic disorder patients (Lydiard et al., 1994; Noyes et al., 1990). Emerging evidence suggests that comorbidity between
panic disorder and both somatoform and pain-related disorders may be best explained by a shared diathesis model (Asmundson & Taylor,
1996; Asmundson et al., 2001).
Panic disorder can be precipitated by the use of psychoactive substances such as caffeine, amphetamines, cocaine, marijuana or alcohol
(Ballenger & Fyer, 1996). Alcohol has been identified as playing a precipitating, maintaining and aggravating role in panic disorder. The 6-
month prevalence of alcohol misuse or dependence in panic disorder has been reported to be 40% in men and 13% in women (Leon et al.,
1995). These rates are higher than those observed in people with other anxiety disorders and those with no anxiety disorder (Leon et al.,
1995). Although heavy drinking can precede panic disorder, alcohol problems can emerge or worsen after panic disorder arises, apparently
as a means of self-medication (Bibb & Chambless, 1986).
Compared to the general population, panic-disordered patients are more likely to have co-occurring avoidant, dependent or histrionic
personality disorders (Taylor & Livesley, 1995). These disorders are also commonly comorbid with other anxiety disorders and with mood
disorders (APA, 2013). Personality problems often remain even when panic disorder is successfully treated (Mavissakalian & Hamann, 1992).
Reasons for comorbidity between panic and personality disorders are currently unclear, but again a common diathesis has been suggested as
causal. Tyrer (1985), for example, proposed a more general neurotic syndrome that runs in families, characterised by fluctuating symptoms
of anxiety, including panic and agoraphobia, and depression, with features of dependent and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
While this hypothesised syndrome helps explain the frequent comorbidity of panic disorder and other disorders, it does not explain why
people with the general neurotic syndrome do or do not develop panic attacks or agoraphobia.
The reader will notice that our opening vignette (Lisa) describes a case of panic disorder and agoraphobia without other comorbid
disorders. We deliberately chose a simple case so we could highlight the interventions used in panic disorder and agoraphobia. For details on
the treatment of more complex cases see Taylor (2000).


Differential diagnosis
Panic disorder is not diagnosed if panics are the direct physiologic result of acute intoxication or withdrawal from a substance (e.g.
intoxication of caffeine, amphetamines or cocaine; withdrawal from alcohol, barbiturates or benzodiazepines). Panic disorder also is not
diagnosed if the attacks are entirely due to a general medical condition (e.g. entirely due to hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism,
phaeochromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure disorders or cardiac conditions) (APA, 2013). Panics arising from these sources may
best be treated with approaches other than those described in this chapter. Thus, differential diagnosis plays an important role for planning
appropriate treatment.
Panic disorder is diagnosed if the attacks continue even when the precipitant is no longer present (e.g. when the patient is no longer
intoxicated with, or in withdrawal from, a psychoactive substance). Panic disorder is also diagnosed if the attacks cannot be entirely
explained by the effects of a drug or a general medical condition. Drugs or medical conditions can trigger or worsen panic disorder. To
illustrate, if Lisa found that she panics more frequently or more severely when she drinks a lot of coffee, she would still be diagnosed with
panic disorder because caffeine consumption is insufficient to explain her panic disorder.
Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the attacks are better accounted for by another psychiatric disorder, such as another anxiety disorder.
To illustrate, a person might seem to have recurrent, unexpected panic attacks. But on further enquiry it might be found that the person
has a specific phobia and is subject to recurrent, unexpected exposures to the phobic stimulus (e.g. a person with dog phobia who had had a
number of unexpected encounters with large, snapping dogs). Here, the attacks only appear unexpected; the attacks are actually cued panics
triggered by unexpected exposure to the phobic object.
Agoraphobia is not diagnosed when the fear, anxiety or avoidance is attributable to another psychiatric disorder, such as another
anxiety disorder. When diagnostic criteria for panic disorder are met, agoraphobia is only diagnosed when avoidance behaviour associated

with panic attacks occurs in two or more agoraphobic situations. Also, agoraphobia should not be diagnosed if avoidance of situations
is determined to be a consequence of another medical condition, such as multiple sclerosis or cardiovascular disorders, where rational
concerns about embarrassment of incapacitation promote restrictions in activity. A detailed history can aid in determining whether
avoidance behaviour is in excess of that typical of the presenting medical condition.
Recall that Lisa had a medical evaluation when she presented to the emergency department. No medical conditions or psychiatric
disorders were identified that could account for her recurrent panic attacks. Therefore, differential diagnoses were ruled out.

Aetiology

Cognitive approaches
In what is probably the most influential and widely cited psychological model of panic, Clark (1986) proposed that panic attacks arise
from a tendency to catastrophically misinterpret arousal-related sensations, alternatively referred to as high anxiety sensitivity (e.g.
misinterpreting palpitations as a sign of impending cardiac arrest; misinterpreting dizziness as a sign that one is about to go crazy;
misinterpreting chest tightness and shortness of breath as an indication that one is about to suffocate). Anxiety sensitivity, measured with
the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3 (Taylor et al., 2007) has three factors: fear of somatic symptoms, fear of psychological symptoms and fear of
publicly observable anxiety reactions. Twin studies suggest that anxiety sensitivity is shaped by a mix of genetic and environmental factors
(Taylor et al., 2008). Other cognitive-behavioural models (e.g. Bouton et al., 2001) similarly emphasise the role of fear of arousal-related
sensations in causing panic. Clark's model and similar approaches are supported by a good deal of empirical research, and have led to a highly
effective form of treatment (Asmundson, LeBouthillier et al., 2014).
To illustrate the cognitive processes proposed by Clark, consider the panic attack reported by Lisa that is diagrammed in Figure 15.1.
Feeling fatigued from a long day of studying, Lisa went into a supermarket to shop for dinner. Suddenly she noticed that her surroundings


seemed "weird and unreal, like being on drugs" (derealisation). Fluorescent lighting (as commonly used in supermarkets) combined with
fatigue is a common but harmless way of inducing derealisation (see Taylor, 2000). Not knowing this, Lisa appraised the derealisation
as strange and threatening ("Things seem weird. Something terrible is happening."). As a result, she became anxiously aroused, and
therefore experienced a range of arousal-related (but harmless) sensations (palpitations, dizziness, trembling). These sensations, along
with derealisation, were catastrophically interpreted by Lisa ("There's something wrong with my brain - maybe I've got mad cow disease!!
Maybe I'm about to die!!"). These thoughts were clearly alarming, which led to more anxious arousal, and to more intense arousal-related
sensations. The rapidly increasing severity of sensations further convinced Lisa that something calamitous was happening. Thus, a vicious
cycle of arousal sensations and catastrophic thoughts unfolded, culminating in a panic attack. This is shown in Figure 15.1. Although the
example illustrates one of Lisa's panics, note that the vicious cycle model in Figure 15.1 is a general one. It was developed to account for panic
attacks in general (for people with panic disorder), rather than simply the case example shown in Figure 15.1. For people with panic disorder,
the attacks seem unexpected because they fail to identify the external or internal triggering stimulus.


Trigger stimulus: Internal or external
(e.g. depersonalization caused by fatigue plus
fluorescent lighting)

Perceived threat
(Things seem
weird. Something
terrible is
happening.)

Apprehension

Sensations
(e.g. palpitations,
dizziness, trembling)

Catastrophic
misinterpretation
(There's something
wrong with my brain –
maybe I've got mad cow
disease!!)

Figure 15.1 An illustration of the cognitive model with one of Lisa's panic attacks
Clark's model is based on several assumptions. The first assumption is that, while recognising that a person's initial panic attack may be
caused by various factors (e.g. drug-related autonomic surges), people prone to panic disorder have an enduring tendency to catastrophically
misinterpret benign arousal sensations. Lisa's first panic may have been triggered by a combination of stress, fatigue and excessive caffeine
consumption, but her subsequent panics were unrelated to stress or caffeine.
The second assumption is that misinterpretations can occur at the conscious and unconscious level (Clark, 1988). Nocturnal (sleep) panics
are explained by positing that people monitor their internal and external environment even while they are sleeping, and therefore some
form of catastrophic misinterpretation can occur while the person is asleep. To explain this concept to patients (or to sceptical clinical
psychology trainees), one can ask them whether they ever wake up at night when they need to go to the bathroom. In our experience, all
patients and clinical trainees readily acknowledge that they indeed, do wake up. We then ask them how they know to wake up. The answer,
of course, is that the brain, at some level, is monitoring bodily sensations (in this case bladder distension). Detection of bladder distension
causes the person to awaken. Similarly, panic patients who are terrified of sensations like skipped heartbeats or shortness of breath will
detect these sensations while asleep, and thereby awaken and panic (see Taylor, 2000, for a further discussion of nocturnal panic).
The third assumption is that the vicious cycle of panic can be entered at any point. The cycle can be initiated by a contextual trigger, for
example, fatigue- and lighting-induced derealisation in the case of Lisa, or simply by having catastrophic thoughts about bodily sensations.
The fourth and final assumption is that physiological changes are viewed as one of several components in a process, rather than as a
pathogenic mechanism.
Cognitive models can also account for agoraphobia. Agoraphobia has long been regarded as a product of operant conditioning (Marks,
1987). Panic attacks typically occur in particular situations (e.g. when in line at a shopping mall, when driving) and serve to motivate
the person to avoid or escape these situations. The avoidance and escape behaviours are negatively reinforced by the reduction of aversive

autonomic arousal and other anxiety-related sensations. Cognitive factors, such as expectations that an attack will be imminent and
harmful and that coping will be ineffective, play a significant role by influencing and maintaining avoidance behaviour (Taylor, 2000).
Biological models
Evidence suggests that several neurotransmitter systems, involving neurotransmitters or neuromodulators such as serotonin,
noradrenalin, adenosine, y-aminobutyric acid and cholecystokinin-4, play a role in panic disorder (Canteras & Graeff, 2014; McNally, 1994;
Paul et al., 2014). Various brain structures in the limbic system and associated regions have also been implicated. Contemporary biological
research emphasises the amygdala, a limbic structure that appears to be involved in coordinating the different neurotransmitters involved
in anxiety disorders, along with other brain regions such as frontal areas and the hippocampus (Canteras & Graeff, 2014; Pannekoek et al.,
2013; Paul et al., 2014). The structures and neurotransmitters are shaped by genetic factors, but little is known about the specific genes
associated with panic disorder (Asmundson, Taylor et al., 2014). Gene-environment interactions may be important, whereby a genetic
vulnerability interacts with stressful life events (Choe et al., 2013).
Today, there is no single, leading biological model of panic. However, there are a number of useful models that guide research and clinical
practice. Among the most promising is the neuroanatomical hypothesis proposed by Gorman et al. (2000), which has been subjected to
minor modifications but retains its major tenets (Dresler et al., 2013). This hypothesis is useful for several reasons. First, it integrates a
wide range of findings, including animal research and studies of humans. Second, it provides a unifying framework for understanding
why panic disorder is associated with so many biological dysregularities, such as abnormalities in various neurotransmitter systems and
irregularities on various indices of autonomic functioning (e.g. Wilhelm et al., 2001; Yeragani et al., 2000). Third, the model accounts for
much of the treatment-outcome data, which show that pharmacological and psychological therapies are both effective treatments. Fourth,
it can subsume Clark's (1986, 1988) cognitive model of panic.


Gorman et al.'s (2000) neuroanatomical hypothesis begins with the observation that there is a remarkable similarity between the
physiological and behavioural consequences of panic attacks in humans and the conditioned fear responses in animals. Similarities include
autonomic arousal, fear evoked by specific cues (contextual fear), and avoidance of these cues. Animal research suggests that conditioned
fear responses are mediated by a "fear network" in the brain, consisting of the amygdala and its afferent and efferent projections, particularly
its connections with the hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex, hypothalamus and brainstem. Animal studies also show that activation
of this network produces biological and behavioural reactions that are similar to those associated with panic attacks. Thus, Gorman et al.
(2000) posit that a similar network is involved in panic disorder.
The fear network consists of a complex matrix of interconnections, implicating a number of brain structures and neurotransmitter
systems (Dresler et al., 2013; LeDoux, 1998). Sensory input passes through the anterior thalamus to the lateral nucleus of the amygdala.
Input is then transferred to the central nucleus of the amygdala, which coordinates autonomic and behavioural responses. Direct sensory
input to the amygdala from brainstem structures and the sensory thalamus enables a rapid response to potentially threatening stimuli. In
addition, there are reciprocal connections between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex, insula and primary somatosensory cortex.
According to Gorman et al. (2000), panic attacks arise from excessive activation of the fear network. In other words, the fear network
becomes sensitised (conditioned) to respond to noxious stimuli such as internal stimuli (bodily sensations) and external stimuli (contexts
or situations) that the person associates with panic. Sensitisation of the network may be manifested by the strengthening of various
projections from the central nucleus of the amygdala to brainstem sites (such as the locus coeruleus, periaqueductal grey region and
hypothalamus). The network could be over-activated if brainstem inputs to the amygdala are dysregulated.
Autonomic activation (e.g. increased respiration and heart rate) and neuroendocrine activation (e.g. increased cortisol secretion) do not
occur in all panic attacks. And a variety of biological agents with diverse physiological properties can trigger panic attacks in people with
panic disorder (e.g. sodium lactate, yohimbine, CO2, caffeine cholecystokinin-4) (McNally, 1994). Therefore, it is unlikely that a single

brainstem dysregulation is responsible for panic or, in turn, that brainstem dysregulation is the only way of producing an overactive fear
network.
Accordingly, Gorman et al. (2000) suggested that there are various ways of activating the fear network, in addition to the aforementioned
mechanism. For example, the amygdala receives input from cortical regions involved in the processing and evaluation of sensory
information. Therefore, a neurocognitive deficit in these cortico-amygdala pathways could result in the catastrophic misinterpretation of
sensory information (i.e. misinterpretation of bodily sensations), leading to an inappropriate activation of the fear network. Notice that this
pathway resembles the cognitive model of panic, described earlier in this chapter. Thus, Gorman et al. (2000) model integrates the cognitive
model and places it in a neuroanatomical context.
Medications, particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), are thought to desensitise the fear network. This may happen
in a number of ways. For example, SSRIs increase serotonergic transmission in the brain (Blier et al., 1987). Serotonergic neurons originate
in the brainstem raphe and project throughout the central nervous system (Tork & Hornung, 1990). Some of these projections have
inhibitory influences. Also, SSRIs may directly inhibit activity of the lateral nucleus of the amygdala (Stutzman & LeDoux, 1999). Effective
psychological therapies are thought to reduce contextual fear and catastrophic misinterpretations at the level of the medial prefrontal cortex
and hippocampus.
Gorman et al.'s (2000) neuroanatomical hypothesis is elegant and comprehensive, and it has the ability to incorporate Clark's (1986)
cognitive model. However, the Gorman hypothesis, like all models of panic, is a work in progress. Dresler et al. (2013) proposed some
modifications to details of the model. More modifications will likely be required as new findings emerge.
Psychodynamic models
The most promising psychodynamic models for understanding panic disorder are those that focus specifically on this disorder. Rather than
review all the models, we will summarise the model developed by the Cornell Panic-Anxiety Study Group (Milrod et al., 1997; Shear et al.,

1993) because it has led to a promising treatment (e.g. Beutel et al., 2013). According to the Cornell group, people at risk for panic disorder
have (1) a neurophysiological vulnerability to panic attacks and/or (2) multiple experiences of developmental trauma. These factors lead
the child to become frightened of unfamiliar situations, and to become excessively dependent on the primary caregiver to provide a sense
of safety. The caregiver is unable to always provide support, so the child develops a fearful dependency. This leads to the development
of unconscious conflicts about dependency (independence vs. reliance on others) and anger (expression vs. inhibition). The dependency
conflict is said to express itself in a number of ways. Some panic-vulnerable people are sensitive to separation and overly reliant on others,
while others are sensitive to suffocation and overly reliant on a sense of independence. These conflicts can activate conscious or unconscious
fantasies of catastrophic danger, which can trigger panic attacks. In addition, the conflicts evoke aversive emotions such as anxiety, anger
and guilt. The otherwise benign arousal sensations accompanying these emotions can become the focus of "conscious as well as unconscious
cognitive catastrophizing" (Shear et al., 1993, p. 862), thereby leading to panic attacks. Thus, again we see that something similar to Clark's
(1986) model finds its way into other models of panic.
Assessment
The most comprehensive and accurate diagnostic information emerges when the clinician uses open-ended questions and empathic
listening, combined with structured enquiry about specific events and symptoms (APA, 2013). An example of one of the most useful
structured interviews is the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-5-CV; First et al., 2015). A complete assessment for panic
disorder also includes a general medical evaluation (APA, 2013), which involves a medical history, review of organ systems, physical
examination and blood tests. A general medical evaluation is important for identifying general medical conditions that mimic or
exacerbate panic attacks or panic-like symptoms (e.g. seizure disorders, cardiac conditions, phaeochromocytoma). These disorders should be
investigated and treated before contemplating a course of panic disorder treatment.

Although these medical mimics are rare, they are important to rule out. Over the past 25 years the first author has encountered three cases
of medical mimics. Two were seizure disorders misdiagnosed as panic disorder. To illustrate, one patient was referred by her primary care
physician with what seemed to be classic panic attacks. As part of the assessment, the cognitive-behaviour therapy (CBT) practitioner (ST)
asked the patient to describe how a typical panic attack unfolded for her. The attacks seemed like real panics. But then the practitioner asked
the patient to describe what happened just before the panics erupted. The patient replied, "I hear a voice, telling me I'm bad." The panics were
apparently triggered by this distressing hallucination. When asked whether she had ever told her doctor about the hallucinations she said,
"No, because he never asked me." A neurological referral was sought to investigate what appeared to be complex partial seizures.
Another example of a medical mimic involved a psychiatry resident who was using CBT to treat another case of what appeared to be
classic panic disorder. Treatment was moderately successful; the patient was no longer panicking, but remained anxious. A further medical
evaluation revealed that she in fact had phaeochromocytoma, not panic disorder. In other words, a sufficient medical evaluation had not
been conducted before commencing CBT.
We present these examples to underscore the importance of conducting a thorough medical evaluation to rule out medical mimics
before contemplating a course of CBT. Medical mimics are rare, but the consequences of misdiagnosis can be harmful for the patient and
embarrassing for the clinician. Consider, for example, a patient with a seizure disorder who has been misdiagnosed as having panic disorder.
Voluntarily hyperventilation (e.g. 2 minutes of rapid, deep breathing) is commonly used as an interoceptive exposure exercise to teach
panic patients that arousal-related sensations like palpitations, dizziness and breathlessness are harmless. But hyperventilation can also
trigger seizures in people with seizure disorders, and thus it is important to rule out seizure disorder before using interventions such as
hyperventilation.
Once a diagnosis has been established, then the diagnostic information can be usefully supplemented by short self-report questionnaires.
Areas to assess include the severity of panic-related symptoms, with the Panic Attacks Symptom Questionnaire (PASQ; Clum et al.,
1990), panic-related cognitions, with the Agoraphobic Cognitions Questionnaire (ACQ; Chambless et al., 1984) and the Body Sensations

Questionnaire (BSQ; Chambless et al., 1984), as well as other variables (see Taylor, 2000, chap. 9, for a detailed review). For example, the
Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3 (Reiss et al., 2008; Taylor et al., 2008) is a useful short questionnaire that can be used to gauge the severity
of the patient's fear of bodily sensations. Scores on this scale can be used to assess whether treatment is altering the patient's tendency to
catastrophically misinterpret bodily sensations. This scale has good reliability and validity, is sensitive to treatment-related effects, and its
post-treatment scores predict who is likely to relapse after panic treatment.
A useful questionnaire to monitor panic symptoms and treatment progress is the Panic and Agoraphobia Scale (Bandelow, 1995). This 13-
item scale was designed as a short, sensitive measure for treatment outcome studies. The patient is asked to rate the past-week frequency
and/or severity of the following: (1) panic attacks, (2) agoraphobia, (3) anticipatory anxiety (i.e. worry about having a panic attack), (4) panic-
related disability in various areas of functioning and (5) worry about the health-related implications of panic (e.g. worry that panic attacks
will lead to a heart attack). The Panic and Agoraphobia Scale has good reliability and validity and is sensitive in detecting treatment-related
change (Bandelow et al., 1995, 1998). Although few scales have yet been developed to specifically assess psychiatric disorders as defined in
the DSM-5, the Brief Dimensional Scales for Anxiety Disorders (LeBeau et al., 2012) provides an assessment of the overall severity of DSM-5
anxiety disorders, including panic disorder and agoraphobia. Preliminary data indicates that the scales have good psychometric properties
(Knappe et al., 2013; LeBeau et al., 2012).
To gain more detailed information on panic attacks, clinicians and clinical researchers often include some form of prospective monitoring
in their assessment batteries (Shear & Maser, 1994). The most widely used are panic attack records. The patient is provided with a definition
of a panic attack and then given a pad of panic attack records that can be readily carried in a purse or pocket. The patient is instructed to
carry the records at all times and to complete one record (sheet) for each full-blown or limited symptom attack, soon after the attack occurs.
Variants on the panic diaries developed by Barlow and colleagues (e.g. Rapee et al., 1990) are among the most informative and easy to use.
A version is presented in Figure 15.2, which shows details of one of Lisa's panic attacks. These records are then reviewed during treatment
sessions to glean information about the links among beliefs, bodily sensations and safety behaviours, and to assess treatment progress.


Lisa reported that the panic attack summarised in Figure 15.2 occurred when she was in a local supermarket. As she walked down the
aisle she looked at the long rows of fluorescent lights and then began to feel mildly derealised. Upon noticing this sensation she increasingly
feared that she had a brain disease that might strike her dead. This frightened her greatly and led to an increase in the intensity of arousal
sensations (as described in the cognitive model of panic; see Figure 15.1). In an effort to reduce the intensity of the feared derealisation,
she averted her gaze from the lights, and began studiously pouring over her shopping list. This avoidance behaviour calmed her down and
reduced the feared derealisation to the point that she was able to quickly leave the supermarket (without her groceries).
PANIC ATTACK RECORD
NAME: Lisa
DATE: April 9 TIME: 10am
WITH: SPOUSE ________ FRIEND _______ STRANGER ______ ALONE ✓
STRESSFUL SITUATION: YES NO
EXPECTED: YES NO
MAXIMUM ANXIETY (CIRCLE)
0-----1-----2-----3-----4-----5-----6-----7-----8
NONE MODERATE EXTREME
SENSATIONS (CHECK):
POUNDING HEART ✓ SWEATING ✓ HOT/COLD FLASH ✓
TIGHT/PAINFUL _____ CHOKING _____ FEAR OF DYING ✓
CHEST
BREATHLESS ✓ NAUSEA _____ FEAR OF GOING CRAZY _____
DIZZY _____ UNREALITY ✓ FEAR OF LOSING ✓
CONTROL
TREMBLING ✓ NUMB/TINGLE ✓
THOUGHTS OR MENTAL IMAGES AT THE TIME (DESCRIBE):
There's something wrong with my brain.
I might suddenly drop dead!


Figure 15.2 A completed panic attack record for Lisa
The panic attack record serves as a useful aide-memoire to help patients recall the details and circumstances of their panic attacks.
Lisa's example shows how the panic attack record helped her recall that she used distraction as an avoidance behaviour. Armed with this
information, the therapist could set up exposure exercises to help Lisa learn whether distraction was essential to protecting her from what
she perceived to be the harmful consequences of derealisation.
Treatment
In the remaining sections of this chapter we will review the major treatments for panic disorder, with particular attention to CBT because
this is among the most effective and enduring (Barlow et al., 2007; Koerner et al., 2012; McCabe & Gifford, 2009; Sánchez-Meca et al., 2010)
and is a recommended treatment of choice in a number of international guidelines (e.g. APA, 2011; NICE, 2011). Space limitations prevent
us from comprehensively reviewing each treatment. For an extended discussion, particularly on the nuts and bolts of CBT, see Taylor (2000).
Cognitive-behaviour therapy
CBT treatment packages include a number of components, such as psychoeducation (e.g. information about the cognitive model of panic),
breathing retraining, cognitive restructuring, relaxation exercises, interoceptive exposure and situational exposure. Breathing retraining
involves teaching the patient to breathe with the diaphragm rather than with the chest muscles. Cognitive restructuring focuses on
challenging patient's beliefs about the dangerousness of bodily sensations (e.g. challenging a belief that palpitations lead to heart attacks).
Interoceptive exposure involves inducing feared bodily sensations to further teach patients that the sensations are harmless. Situational
exposure involves activities that bring the patient into feared situations such as shopping malls, bridges or tunnels. Situational exposure
also involves discouraging the patient from engaging in subtle avoidance behaviours (also known as safety behaviours). These include,


for example, distracting oneself from distressing (but harmless) stimuli (e.g. trying to avoid looking at derealisation-inducing fluorescent
lights).
A large body of evidence shows that CBT is effective in reducing panic disorder, agoraphobia and associated symptoms such as depression
(Barlow et al., 2007; Koerner et al., 2012; McCabe & Gifford, 2009; Sánchez-Meca et al., 2010; Taylor, 2000). However, not all CBT
interventions may be necessary. Interoceptive exposure, situational exposure and cognitive restructuring are the most widely used and
supported interventions. Despite the advantages of exposure exercises, they are medically contraindicated in some cases. For example, a
hyperventilation exercise would not be used in a patient with severe asthma (see Taylor, 2000, for details).
Several studies suggest that breathing retraining reduces panic frequency (Taylor, 2000). However, recent research casts doubt about the
importance of hyperventilation in producing panic attacks. This suggests that breathing retraining may only be useful for a minority of
patients, for which chest breathing or hyperventilation plays a role in producing panic symptoms (Taylor, 2001). Breathing retraining may
be counterproductive if it prevents patients from learning that their catastrophic beliefs are unfounded. Given these concerns, breathing
retraining should be used sparingly in the treatment of panic disorder. If used at all, the clinician should ensure that the patient understands
that breathing exercises are used to remove unpleasant but harmless sensations. Similarly, relaxation training is not always necessary.
Interoceptive exposure and cognitive restructuring are important for helping patients learn that the sensations of physiological arousal are
not dangerous.
CBT can be augmented by involving the patient's spouse in treatment (Baucom et al., 2003; Taylor, 2000). This can be done either by
inviting the spouse (with the patient's permission) to serve as a coach or therapist's aid in conducting situational exposure exercises.
Alternatively, couple therapy can be incorporated into treatment when there is evidence of relationship problems. This may be particularly
important when relationship problems interfere with the treatment of panic and agoraphobia (e.g. when there is evidence that the spouse
is interfering with treatment, such as criticising the patient as being "weak" for seeking treatment for panic from a mental health
professional).


There are several detailed manuals for teaching clinicians how to do CBT for panic disorder (e.g. Craske & Barlow, 2006). However, there is
no substitute for apprenticeship training, where the trainee learns first-hand how to do this therapy from an experienced CBT practitioner.
The following example of the interventions used with Lisa should give readers a taste for what is involved in CBT for panic disorder and
agoraphobia, at least for a simple case in which there was no other complicating (comorbid) disorders. Thus, the goals of CBT treatment may
be summarised as (1) the reduction or elimination of panic attacks, (2) the reduction or elimination of avoidance behaviour associated with
agoraphobia and (3) the reduction of the vulnerability to developing further panic attacks or agoraphobia (Andrews et al., 2003).
Case example: Lisa's treatment
Prior to commencing treatment, the CBT practitioner collected detailed information about Lisa's panic attacks. The most useful information
came from the panic attack records (see Figure 15.2 for an example). The information gleaned from these records enabled the clinician
to develop a working hypothesis of the sorts of beliefs and associated catastrophic misinterpretations that seems to play a role in Lisa's
problems. The assessment suggested that Lisa harboured the following beliefs:
• Lethal brain diseases, like mad cow disease, are lurking everywhere.
• These diseases can strike people down unexpectedly.
• The first signs of these diseases are unusual perceptual experiences.
How did these beliefs arise? An assessment of her history of panic disorder and her early experiences indicated that she had long been
exposed to information about lethal viral diseases. Her father worked in the health sciences, and often held court over family meals, regaling
the family with tales of exotic diseases that he had encountered or heard about in his line of work. During the year before Lisa's first
panic attack, she read many newspaper accounts of lethal diseases threatening her community. The list included severe acute respiratory

syndrome (SARS), West Nile virus, monkey pox, and, of course, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease). Her early exposure to
tales of deadly diseases, combined with the recent media reports of such diseases, heightened Lisa's concerns, and led her to become vigilant
for any signs that she might be afflicted with a serious disease. Thus, her learning history and recent experiences set her up to misinterpret
benign sensations, such as derealisation induced by fatigue and fluorescent lighting.
Furnished with this information, the clinician implemented treatment as follows. First, the formulation was shared with Lisa. This was
done for the purpose of psychoeducation, and Lisa's feedback was also elicited to identify any flaws in the formulation. Lisa agreed with
the formulation; it fit well with her experience. As part of psychoeducation, the vicious cycle model (Figure 15.1) was also shared with
Lisa, to show her how unexpected sensations (e.g. derealisation unexpectedly triggered by fatigue and fluorescent lighting) could lead to
catastrophic misinterpretation and the spiral into panic. Because the sensations occurred unexpectedly, the panic attacks seemed (to Lisa) to
occur unexpectedly. For Lisa, this information was valuable; it made her panics more understandable and predictable, and less frightening.
Contrast this education with the information Lisa received from the emergency room. There she was told that there was nothing wrong
with her health, and that her panics were simply due to stress. The information from the ER doctors was not helpful because it didn't tell
Lisa how her panics could be caused by something as benign as stress. She left the ER feeling confused and unconvinced. In contrast, the
information she received from the CBT practitioner gave her a clear, concrete explanation of how and why her panics arose. And importantly,
the explanation suggested some ways that she could overcome her panic attacks.
Cognitive restructuring exercises were also used to help Lisa realistically appraise the probability of succumbing to a lethal condition
such as mad cow disease. She realised that she would need to accept that there were no guarantees that she would ever be completely free
from danger; living in the world involves the acceptance of risk. Lisa realised that she calmly accepted many risks in her daily life, such as
driving and crossing streets (which lead to many more fatalities than mad cow disease). She was also encouraged, with the therapist's help,
to generate a list of benign things that induce derealisation (e.g. fatigue, lighting, cold medications, stress). This led to a discussion of the
probability that her next bout of derealisation would indicate mad cow disease instead of some benign cause. Through this discussion Lisa

realised that the odds were exceeding low - in fact, almost zero - that her next episode of derealisation would be a harbinger of mad cow
disease.
Although these discussions were therapeutic, the CBT practitioner next suggested to Lisa that they needed to go further, to strongly prove
to her that everyday causes of derealisation were harmless. The therapist asked her how they could do that. In other words, the therapist
initiated a careful line of questioning to help Lisa problem solve - to think of ways of overcoming her fear of derealisation. This type of
questioning is a form of Socratic dialogue, commonly used in CBT for panic disorder (and other emotional disorders). Socratic dialogue
encourages the patient to become their own therapist, and thereby encourages and prepares them to solve emotional problems in their daily
lives (for an extended discussion of Socratic dialogue, see Taylor, 2000, chap. 12).
Through this line of questioning, Lisa realised that interoceptive exposure would be useful in proving to herself that derealisation was
harmless. Several 5-minute exercises were used: staring at a fluorescent light, staring at a spot on the wall and looking through a book
on visual illusions that induced perceptual distortions. When practising these exercises, Lisa was encouraged to notice any perceptual
aberrations, and to not distract herself from them, or to use any other form of avoidance. The goal was for Lisa to learn that derealisation
does not have any harmful consequences, such as death.
Initially, Lisa felt anxious during these exercises, and even had a mild panic attack while leafing through the book on visual illusions.
The therapist reframed the panic attack as an important learning experience. Lisa was encouraged to reflect on what led her to panic while
looking at the book. She realised that one of the illusions triggered the false sensation of shimmering and colour. This was a visual illusion
that she had not previously experienced. She catastrophically misinterpreted this "new" perceptual aberration, and thereby panicked.
Armed with this important piece of information, Lisa and her therapist realised that she should be exposed to a wide range of illusion-
inducing stimuli, in order to limit the chances that she would catastrophically misinterpret any "new" illusions in the future. Accordingly,
additional interoceptive exercises were added: staring at her hand for 5-10 minutes, staring at her face in a mirror, and staring at and then

looking away from brightly coloured objects (in order to induce visual after-images). Lisa's anxiety gradually abated over the course of four
50-minute sessions of these exercises. The frequency of panic attacks in her daily life similarly abated.
Lisa and her therapist then designed and implemented a series of situational exposure exercises (set as "homework" assignments in
between treatment sessions), in order to reduce her agoraphobia. The exercises were implemented in a gradual, step-by-step fashion,
beginning with the easiest exercise. Lisa began by returning to the supermarket in which she had panicked in the past. The initial goal was
to enter the supermarket in the morning on a weekday, when the store was uncrowded. She spent 30 minute shopping for a few small items,
while also being mindful of the fluorescent lighting. Once this task no longer evoked anxiety, Lisa returned to the supermarket at a busier
time of day (in the early evening after work). Once this was mastered, she went to the supermarket at a very busy time (Saturday mornings).
Each time she shopped for a few small items and deliberately paid attention to the fluorescent lighting. Similar graduated exposure exercises
were planned and conducted for the other situations that she feared and avoided, such as travelling by train and entering crowded bars.
Situational exposure was conducted over 8 weeks. By that time her agoraphobia was substantially reduced, although there were some
residual symptoms (e.g. she continued to feel anxious in crowded, stuffy trains). Lisa was encouraged to continually practise, as needed, the
situational exposure exercises.
The formal course of therapy (12 weeks) ended with a discussion of three topics: (1) a review of the progress made in treatment,
including a review of the interventions she found to be most useful; (2) a discussion of the symptoms that remained to be addressed, and
the development of a plan how to address them (e.g. ongoing situational exposure to crowded, stuffy trains); and (3) the development of
a plan for relapse prevention. The latter began by asking Lisa to try to think of what conditions might lead her to panic in the future.
After some thought she realised that she might panic if something happened that induced strong perceptual aberrations. A list of examples
was generated, including the following: a bout of influenza might lead to light-headedness and dizziness; cold medications could induce
depersonalisation; anaesthetic for surgery or dental procedures could induce faintness and weird bodily feelings. Lisa was asked to draft
a written plan of how she would deal with panic attacks in the future, such as those triggered by these examples. Lisa's plan consisted


of the following. If she panicked in the future, she would: (1) analyse the situation to identify the feared sensations and the catastrophic
misinterpretation; (2) implement interoceptive exercises to induce and become accustomed to the feared sensations; (3) implement
situational exposure exercises if she was beginning to develop agoraphobia; and (4) if these don't work, then she should telephone her
therapist for some booster sessions.
Couples-based approaches
Partner-assisted CBT has been shown in a series of treatment outcome studies to be as effective as individual CBT. Clinically, it is worth
considering couples-based approach when there are relationship difficulties or where a partner is inadvertently reinforcing a patient's
symptoms (Baucom et al., 2003; Byrne et al., 2004). In partner-assisted CBT, the patient's partner is coached in (1) avoiding inadvertently
reinforcing catastrophic thinking and agoraphobic avoidance behaviours through excessive care-taking; (2) actively reinforcing the
development of anxiety management skills and the completion of exposure-based homework assignments; and (3) couples-based
communication and problem-solving skills.
Other psychosocial interventions
Several other approaches have been used in the treatment of panic disorder, including psychodynamic psychotherapies (Milrod et al., 2000;
Wiborg & Dahl, 1996), hypnosis (e.g. Stafrace, 1994), and mindfulness meditation (Miller et al., 1995). Hypnosis appears to be of limited
value in treating panic disorder, and may be no better than placebo (Taylor, 2000). Another form of psychotherapy for panic disorder, called
emotion-focused psychotherapy, has been found to be less effective than either CBT or imipramine, and is no more effective than placebo
(Shear et al., 2001). An intervention that looks more promising is mindfulness meditation (e.g. Kim et al., 2009; Miller et al., 1995), although
further evaluation is required. Studies have yielded encouraging findings for psychodynamic psychotherapies modified to specifically focus
on panic symptoms (Beutel et al., 2013; Milrod et al., 2000; Wiborg & Dahl, 1996). However, none has been as extensively evaluated as CBT.


For CBT, gains are maintained at follow-ups of 2 years or more (e.g. Gloster et al., 2013), and the treatment can be efficaciously implemented
over the Internet (Hedman et al., 2013).
Pharmacotherapies
Controlled studies show that effective anti-panic medications include tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. imipramine), monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs; e.g. phenelzine), benzodiazepines (e.g. alprazolam, clonazepam, lorazepam), SSRIs (e.g. fluvoxamine, fluoxetine,
paroxetine, sertraline) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs; e.g. venlafaxine, duloxetine). These treatments have
broadly similar efficacy, although there is evidence that SSRIs tend to be most effective (Andrisano et al., 2013; Boyer, 1995; Pollack & Simon,
2009; Roy-Byrne & Cowley, 2007; Taylor, 2000). The trade names of many drugs vary across countries, so in this chapter we list only their
generic names. The typical dose ranges (mg/day) of the commonly used medications are as follows:
• Imipramine: 50-300
• Phenelzine: 45-90
• Alprazolam: 2-10
• Clonazepam: 1-3
• Lorazepam: 2-6
• Fluvoxamine: 50-300
• Fluoxetine: 20-80
• Paroxetine: 10-50
• Sertraline: 50-200


The medications differ in their side effects and contraindications. Anticholinergic effects (e.g. blurred vision, dry mouth) are common
problems with tricyclics. The latter medications are also contraindicated in patients with particular comorbid cardiac disorders (Simon &
Pollack, 2000). Dietary restrictions (i.e. abstaining from foods containing tyramine) are a limitation of many MAOIs (Stein & Stahl, 2000).
Sedation, impaired motor coordination and addiction are concerns with benzodiazepines (Barbone et al., 1998). To illustrate the latter
problems, one of the first author's patients (suffering from panic disorder and agoraphobia) reported that, prior to commencing CBT, he had
tried alprazolam (prescribed by his family doctor). He felt greatly relaxed by the medication and he felt like he could resume formerly avoided
activities, such as entering supermarkets and driving. Unfortunately, however, alprazolam impaired his driving skills (and his ability to
judge that his skills were impaired). In the initial weeks on alprazolam he ventured out driving, only to have a rear-end collision when he
failed to notice that the car ahead of him had stopped at a traffic light. He was not injured in the accident, but it reinforced his fear of driving,
and also made him afraid to take alprazolam.
When efficacy and side effects are considered together, SSRIs and, possibly, SNRIs emerge as the most promising drug treatments for panic
disorder. However, even SSRIs have side effects, with the most troublesome being a short-term increase in arousal-related sensations (the
"jitteriness syndrome"; Pohl et al., 1988). To overcome this problem, SSRIs can be started at a low dose (e.g. 5-10 mg/day for paroxetine; 12.5-
25 mg/day for sertraline) and then increased gradually (e.g. up to 10-50 mg/day for paroxetine; up to 25-200 mg/day for sertraline). The
choice of SSRI is determined on the basis of several factors, including side effects, patient preference, and the patient's history of responding
(or not responding) to particular agents (Simon & Pollack, 2000).
For drug refractory patients, or patients who are unable to tolerate SSRI side effects, combination medications are sometimes used.
SSRIs, for example, can be augmented with benzodiazepines or other agents (Bandelow & Eckert, 2004; Uhlenhuth et al., 1999). Despite
some positive preliminary reports supporting this strategy, its value in the treatment of panic disorder remains to be properly evaluated.
An alternative strategy is to change the patient's medication. Some of the newer, non-SSRI antidepressants could be considered, such as
venlafaxine or gabapentin (Simon & Pollack, 2000). A concern with using these newer medications to treat panic disorder is that there

are few data to guide the clinician. Another approach to the drug refractory patient is to use a psychosocial treatment, such as CBT, as an
alternative or adjunctive intervention.
How effective are medications compared to CBT? A small but growing literature suggests that the efficacy of CBT is equal to or greater
than that of alprazolam, imipramine, and possibly SSRIs at post-treatment (Barlow et al., 2000; Taylor, 2000). Follow-up studies suggest that
the effects of CBT may be more enduring than the effects of medications. This is probably because CBT, unlike pharmacotherapies, teaches
patients skills for coping with, and overcoming, panic disorder and agoraphobia. These skills can be used as needed after the formal course
of therapy ends.
Combining CBT with drug treatments
Simultaneous treatments
Clinical lore holds that the optimal treatment consists of drugs combined with some form of psychosocial intervention (e.g. Alexander,
1991; Fahy et al., 1992). This view arose from observations that even the most effective drugs and the most effective psychosocial
interventions do not eliminate panic disorder in all cases. It was thought that combination treatments might be a way to improve
treatment outcome. The available evidence provides mixed support for this view (Pull, 2007). Evidence suggests that the efficacy of CBT
is not improved when it is combined with either diazepam or alprazolam (Taylor, 2000); in fact, some studies have found that the efficacy
of situational exposure is worse when alprazolam is added (Echeburúa et al., 1993; Marks et al., 1993). Several studies have compared
CBT to CBT plus imipramine. The results have also been mixed. Adding imipramine in the range of 150-300 mg/day to either situational
exposure or CBT sometimes improves treatment outcome in the short term, provided that patients are able to tolerate the dose (Barlow et
al., 2000; Taylor, 2000). Any advantage of combined treatment tends to be lost at follow-up. Similarly, studies of combining CBT with SSRIs
(fluvoxamine or paroxetine) have produced mixed results, with some studies finding the combination is no better than CBT alone (Sharp

et al., 1996), others finding that the combination is most effective (de Beurs et al., 1995; Oehrberg et al., 1995), and yet others finding the
combination to be most effective in some symptom domains but not others (Stein et al., 2000). Methodological limitations of these studies
might account for the inconsistent findings (Black, 2006; Taylor, 2000).
It remains unclear whether treatment outcome is enhanced by combining CBT with SSRIs. Gorman et al.'s (2000) neuroanatomical
hypothesis, with its dual emphasis on cortical and serotonergic mechanisms, suggests that combined treatment ought to be superior to
either CBT alone or SSRIs alone. But, on the other hand, pharmacotherapies such as SSRIs could undermine the patient's confidence in
implementing CBT, particularly if they attribute their gains to medications rather than to their own efforts at using the skills learned in CBT
(Basoglu et al., 1994; Brown & Barlow, 1995).
Sequential treatments
A more promising type of combined therapy is a sequential approach, where patients are treated with pharmacotherapy during the acute
phase, and then are treated with CBT as the medication is phased out. However, a recent review of clinical trials combining sequential
treatment for various anxiety disorders indicates that the sequential approach does not improve long-term outcomes (Fava et al., 2005).
Several studies have shown that adding CBT during the tapering period for alprazolam and clonazepam reduces the relapse rate associated
with these drugs (e.g. Bruce et al., 1999; Otto et al., 1993). While there is no reason to expect otherwise, it remains to be demonstrated
whether CBT can reduce relapse when patients are tapered off other anti-panic drugs. A similar sequential approach can be used with
treatment of non-responders. CBT has been shown to be effective for medication-refractory patients (e.g. Biondi & Picardi, 2003; Heldt et
al., 2003), and SSRIs can be successful with patients who have failed to fully respond to CBT (Kampman et al., 2002). The clinician could
therefore start with one of these treatments (drugs or CBT), and if the patient does not respond then change to the other treatment.
Patients who initially respond to drugs, however, may still require CBT during the drug-tapering phase in order to reduce the risk of relapse.


Additional research on the application of sequential treatments (e.g. pharmacotherapy followed by psychotherapy, psychotherapy followed
by pharmacotherapy, one type of pharmacotherapy followed by another) in the treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia is needed.

Summary
Panic disorder and agoraphobia are common conditions, with a lifetime prevalence rates of 1-7% and 2-4%, respectively. Treatment
planning typically begins with a thorough assessment, including a medical history, a structured diagnostic interview and prospective
monitoring of symptoms. Based on contemporary biological and cognitive-behavioural models, there are several treatment options. These
include various pharmacotherapies, particularly SSRIs, and psychosocial interventions, particularly CBT. Preliminary evidence suggests that
treatments that combine SSRIs and CBT may be somewhat more effective than either treatment alone, at least in the short term and in some
symptom domains. Evidence suggests that the effects of CBT may be more enduring than those of medications. This is probably because
CBT, unlike pharmacotherapies, teaches patients skills for coping with, and overcoming, panic disorder and agoraphobia. These skills can be
used as needed after the formal course of therapy ends. There are several detailed manuals for teaching clinicians how to do CBT for panic
disorder, but there is no substitute for apprenticeship training, where one learns how to do this therapy first-hand from an experienced CBT
practitioner.

Skills-building exercises for practitioners
Divide into groups of three. Using the case of Lisa, assign roles of client, therapist and observer. Rotate roles through the following role-plays:
1. Initial session, where you meet Lisa for assessment of presenting problem.
2. Second session, during which you discuss with Lisa a formulation of her difficulties.


3. Second session, during which you provide psychoeducation; discuss with Lisa the vicious cycle of misinterpretation of symptoms and
escalation of panic; and outline the cognitive-behavioural treatment approach.
4. Later session, during which you complete the Thought Record (see Chapter 3) with Lisa for one of her recent panic attacks.
Further reading for practitioners
Andrews, G., Creamer, M., Crino, R., Hunt, C., Lampe, L., & Page, A. (2003). The Treatment of Anxiety Disorders: Clinician Guides and Patient
Manuals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barlow, D. H. (2014). Clinical Handbook of Psychological Disorders (Fifth Edition). Oxford: Guilford.
Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Master Your Anxiety and Panic: Therapist Guide (Fourth Edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, S. (2000). Understanding and Treating Panic Disorder: Cognitive-Behavioural Approaches. Chichester: Wiley.
Evidence summaries
Barlow, D., Allen, L., & Basden, E. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for panic disorders, phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder. In P.
Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 351-394). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koerner, N.M., Vorstenbosch, V., & Antony, M. (2012). Panic disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based
Practice in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 285-313). Chichester: Wiley.
McCabe, R., & Gifford, S. (2009). Psychological treatment for panic disorder and agoraphobia. In M. M. Antony, & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders (pp. 308-320). Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Pollack, M., & Simon, N. (2009). Pharmacotherapy for panic disorder and agoraphobia. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders (pp. 295-307). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Roy-Byrne, P., & Cowley, D. (2007). Pharmacological treatments of panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia and
social anxiety disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments that Work (Third Edition, pp. 395-430). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Sánchez-Meca, J., Rosa-Alcázar, A. I., Marín-Martínez, F., & Gómez-Conesa, A. (2010). Psychological treatment of panic disorder with or
without agoraphobia: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 37-50.
Assessment instruments
Bandelow, B. (1995). Assessing the efficacy of treatments for panic disorder and agoraphobia: II. The Panic and Agoraphobia Scale.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 10, 73-81.
Chambless, D., Caputo, G., Bright, P., & Gallagher, R. (1984). Assessment of fear in agoraphobics: the Body Sensations Questionnaire and
the Agoraphobic Cognitions Questionnaire. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52, 1090-1097.
Chambless, D., Caputo, G., Jasin, S., Gracely, E., & Williams, C. (1985). The Mobility Inventory for Agoraphobia. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 23, 35-44.
Clum, G., Broyles, S., Borden, J., & Watkins, P. (1990). Validity and reliability of the panic Attack Symptoms and Cognitions
Questionnaires. Special Issue DSM IV and the psychology literature. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioural Assessment, 12, 233-245.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.


LeBeau, R. T., Glenn, D. E., Hanover, L. N., Beesdo-Baum, K., & Craske, M. G. (2012). A dimensional approach to measuring anxiety for
DSM-5. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatry Research 21, 258-272.
Rapee, R., Craske, M., Brown, T., & Barlow, D. (1995). Measurement of perceived control over anxiety related events. Behaviour Therapy,
27, 279-293.
Reiss, S., Peterson, R. A., Taylor, S., Schmidt, N. B., & Weems, C. F. (2008). Anxiety Sensitivity Index Consolidated Test Manual: ASI, ASI-3,
and CASI (Third Edition). Worthington, OH: IDS Publishing.
Scupi, B., Maser, J., & Uhde, T. (1992). The National Institute of Mental Health Panic Questionnaire: An instrument for assessing the
clinical characteristics of panic disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 180, 566-572.
Further reading for clients
Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2006). Mastery of Your Anxiety and Panic: Workbook (Fourth Edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bourne, E. (2015). The Anxiety and Phobia Workbook (Sixth Edition). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Burns, D. D. (2007). When Panic Attacks: The New, Drug-Free Anxiety Therapy That Can Change Your Life. Oxford: Morgan Road Books.
Silove, D., & Manicavasagar, V. (1997). Overcoming Panic and Agoraphobia: A Self-Help Guide Using Cognitive Behavioural Techniques.
London: Constable & Robinson.
References
Alexander, P. E. (1991). Management of panic disorders. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 23, 329-333.


American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-
IV-TR). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA) (2011). Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with Panic Disorder (Second Edition).
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Andrews, G., Creamer, M., Crino, R., Hunt, C., Lampe, L., & Page, A. (2003). The Treatment of Anxiety Disorders: Clinician Guides and Patient
Manuals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Andrisano, C., Chiesa, A., & Serretti, A. (2013). Newer antidepressants and panic disorder: A meta-analysis. International Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 28, 33-45.
Asmundson, G.J.G., LeBouthillier, D., & Taylor, S. (2014). Panic disorder and agoraphobia. In A. Tasman, J. Lieberman, J. Kay, M. First, & M.
Riba (Eds.), Psychiatry (Fourth Edition, Volume 2, pp. 1057-1075). Oxford: Wiley.
Asmundson, G.J.G., & Taylor, S. (1996). Role of anxiety sensitivity in pain-related fear and avoidance. Journal of Behavioural Medicine, 19,
573-582.
Asmundson, G.J.G., Taylor, S., & Smits, J. (2014). Panic disorder and agoraphobia: An overview and commentary on DSM-5 changes.
Depression and Anxiety, 31, 480-486.
Asmundson, G.J.G., Walker, J. R., Furer, P., & Kjernisted, K. (2000, March). Beyond Anxiety: A Preliminary Look at Acute and Chronic Pain in
Individuals Seeking Treatment for Anxiety Disorders. Paper presented at the 20th annual meeting of the Anxiety Disorders Association of
America, Washington, DC.


Asmundson, G.J.G., Wright, K. D., Taylor, S., & Cox, B. J. (2001). Future directions and challenges in assessment, treatment, and
investigation of health anxiety. In G.J.G. Asmundson, S. Taylor, & B. J. Cox (Eds.), Health Anxiety: Clinical and Research Perspectives on
Hypochondriasis and Related Disorders (pp. 365-381). Chichester: Wiley.
Ballenger, J. C., & Fyer, A. J. (1996). Panic disorder and agoraphobia. In T. A. Widiger, A. J. Frances, H. A., Pincus, R. Ross, M. B. First, & W.
W. Davis (Eds.), DSM-IV Sourcebook (Vol. 2, pp. 411-471). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Bandelow, B. (1995). Assessing the efficacy of treatments for panic disorder and agoraphobia. II. The Panic and Agoraphobia Scale.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 10, 73-81.
Bandelow, B., Brunner, E., Broocks, A., Beinroth, D., Hajak, G., Pralle, L., & Rüther, E. (1998). The use of the Panic and Agoraphobia Scale in
a clinical trial. Psychiatry Research, 77, 43-49.
Bandelow, B., & Eckert, R. (2004). Treatment-resistant panic disorder. CNS Spectrums, 9, 723-739.
Bandelow, B., Hajak, G., Holzrichter, S., Kunert, H. J., & Rüther, E. (1995). Assessing the efficacy of treatments for panic disorder and
agoraphobia. I. Methodological problems. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 10, 83-93.
Barbone, F., McMahon, A. D., & Davey, P. G. (1998). Association of road-traffic accidents with benzodiazepine use. Lancet, 352, 1331-
1336.
Barlow, D., Allen, L., & Basden, E. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for panic disorders, phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder. In P.
Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments that Work (Third Edition, pp. 351-394). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioural therapy, imipramine, or their combination for
panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 283, 2529-2536.
Basoglu, M., Marks, I. M., Kiliç, C., Brewin, C. R., & Swinson, R. P. (1994). Alprazolam and exposure for panic disorder with agoraphobia:
Attribution of improvement to medication predicts subsequent relapse. British Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 652-659.


Baucom, D., Stanton, S., & Epstein, N. (2003). Anxiety disorders. In D. Snyder & M. Whisman (Eds.), Treating Difficult Couples. Helping
Clients with Coexisting Mental and Relationship Disorders (pp. 57-88). Oxford: Guilford.
Beutel, M. E., Scheurich, V., Knebel, A., Michal, M., Wiltink, J., Graf-Morgenstern, M., ... Subic-Wrana, C. (2013). Implementing panic-
focused psychodynamic psychotherapy into clinical practice. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 58, 326-334.
Bibb, J., & Chambless, D. L. (1986). Alcohol use and abuse among diagnosed agoraphobics. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24, 49-58.
Biondi, M., & Picardi, A. (2003). Increased probability of remaining in remission from panic disorder with agoraphobia after drug
treatment in patients who received concurrent cognitive-behavioural therapy: A follow-up study. Psychotherapy & Psychosomatics, 72,
34-42.
Black, D. W. (2006). Efficacy of combined pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy versus monotherapy in the treatment of anxiety
disorders. CNS Spectrums, 11 (Suppl. 112), 29-33.
Blier, P., DeMontigny, C., & Chaput, Y. (1987). Modifications of the serotonin system by antidepressant treatments: Implications for the
therapeutic response in major depression. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 7, 24S-35S.
Bouton, M. E., Mineka, S., & Barlow, D. H. (2001). A modern learning theory perspective on the aetiology of panic disorder. Psychological
Review, 108, 4-32.
Boyer, W. (1995). Serotonin uptake inhibitors are superior to imipramine and alprazolam in alleviating panic attacks: A meta-analysis.
International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 10, 45-49.
Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1995). Long-term outcome in cognitive-behavioural treatment of panic disorder: Clinical predictors and
alternative strategies for assessment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 754-765.
Bruce, T. J., Spiegel, D. A., & Hegel, M. T. (1999). Cognitive-behavioural therapy helps prevent relapse and recurrence of panic disorder
following alprazolam discontinuation: A long-term follow-up of the Peoria and Dartmouth studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 67, 151-156.


Byrne, M., Carr, A., & Clarke, M. (2004). The efficacy of couples-based interventions for panic disorder with agoraphobia. Journal of Family
Therapy, 26, 105-125.
Canteras, N. S., & Graeff, F. G. (2014). Executive and modulatory neural circuits of defensive reactions: Implications for panic disorder.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Reviews, advance online publication.
Chambless, D. L., Caputo, G. C., Bright, P., & Gallagher, R. (1984). Assessment of fear in agoraphobics: The Body Sensations Questionnaire
and the Agoraphobic Cognitions Questionnaire. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 52, 1090-1097.
Choe, A. Y., Kim, B., Lee, K. S., Lee, J. E., Lee, J.-Y., Choi, T. K., & Lee, S. H. (2013). Serotonergic genes (5-HTT and HTR1A) and separation life
events: Gene-by-environment interaction for panic disorder. Neuropsychobiology, 67, 192-200.
Clark, D. M. (1986). A cognitive approach to panic. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24, 461-470.
Clark, D. M. (1988). A cognitive model of panic attacks. In S. Rachman & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Panic: Psychological Perspectives (pp. 71-89).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Clum, G. A., Broyles, S., Borden, J., & Watkins, P. L. (1990). Validity and reliability of the panic attack symptoms and cognitions
questionnaires. Special Issue: DSM-IV and the psychology literature. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioural Assessment, 12, 233-
245.
Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Master your Anxiety and Panic: Therapist Guide (Fourth Edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Beurs, E., van Balkom, A.J.L.M., Lange, A., Koele, P., & van Dyck, R. (1995). Treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia: Comparison
of fluvoxamine, placebo, and psychological panic management combined with exposure and of exposure in vivo alone. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 152, 683-691.
Domschke, K. (2013). Revise the revised? New
Dresler, T., Guhn, A., Tupak, S. V., Ehlis, A.-C., Herrmann, M. J., Fallgatter, A. J.,
dimensions of the neuroanatomical hypothesis of panic disorder. Journal of Neural Transmission, 120, 3-29.


Echeburúa, E., De Corral, P., Bajos, E. G., & Borda, M. (1993). Interactions between self-exposure and alprazolam in the treatment of
agoraphobia without current panic: An exploratory study. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 21, 219-238.
Fahy, T. J., O'Rourke, D., Brophy, J., Schazmann, W., & Sciascia, S. (1992). The Galway study of panic disorder I: Clomipramine and
lofepramine in DSM III-R panic disorder: A placebo controlled trial. Journal of Affective Disorders, 25, 63-76.
Faravelli, C., Furukawa, T. A., & Truglia, E. (2009). Panic disorder In G. Andrews, D. Charney, P. Sirovatka, & D. Regier (Eds.), Stress-Induced
and Fear Circuitry Disorders (pp. 31-58). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Fava, G. A., Ruini, C., & Rafanelli, C. (2005). Sequential treatment of mood and anxiety disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 66, 1392-
1400.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Gloster, A. T., Hauke, C., Hofler, M., Einsle, F., Fydrich, T., Hamm, A., ... Wittchen, H.-U. (2013). Long-term stability of cognitive
behavioural therapy effects for panic disorder with agoraphobia: A two-year follow-up study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51, 830-
839.
Gorman, J., Kent, J. M., Sullivan, G. M., & Coplan, J. D. (2000). Neuroanatomical hypothesis of panic disorder, revised. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 157, 493-505.
Grant, B. F., Hassin, D. S., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Goldstein, R. B., Smith, S., ... Saha, T. D. (2006). The epidemiology of DSM-IV panic
disorder and agoraphobia in the United States: Results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 363-374.
Hedman, E., Ljótsson, B., Ruck, C., Bergstrom, J., Andersson, G., Kaldo, V., ... Lindefors, N. (2013). Effectiveness of internet-based
cognitive behaviour therapy for panic disorder in routine psychiatric care. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 128, 457-467.


Heldt, E., Manfro, G. G., Kipper, L., Blaya, C., Maltz, S., Isolan, L., Hirakata, V. N., & Otto, M. W. (2003). Treating medication-resistant panic
disorder: Predictors and outcome of cognitive-behaviour therapy in a Brazilian public hospital. Psychotherapy & Psychosomatics, 72, 43-
48.
Kampman, M., Keijsers, G. P., Hoogduin, C. A., & Hendriks, G. J. (2002). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of the
effects of adjunctive paroxetine in panic disorder patients unsuccessfully treated with cognitive-behavioural therapy alone. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry, 63, 772-777.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Jin, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Walters, E. E. (2006). The epidemiology of panic attacks, panic disorder, and
agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity Survey replication. Archives of General Psychiatry 63, 415-424.
Kessler, R. C., Petukhova, M., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Wittchen, H.-U. (2012). Twelve-month and lifetime prevalence and
lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood disorder in the United States. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 21, 169–
184.
Kim, Y. W., Lee, S. H., Choi, T. K., Suh, S. Y., Kim, B., Kim, C. M., ... Yook, K. H. (2009). Effectiveness of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
as an adjuvant to pharmacotherapy in patients with panic disorder or generalized anxiety disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 601-606.
Knappe, S., Klotsche, J., Strobel, A., LeBeau, R. T., Craske, M. G., Wittchen, H.-U., & Beesdo-Baum, K. (2013). Dimensional anxiety scales for
DSM-5: Sensitivity to clinical severity. European Psychiatry, 28, 448-456.
Koerner, N., Vorstenbosch, V., & Antony, M. (2012). Panic disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based Practice
in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 285-313). Chichester: Wiley.
LeBeau, R. T., Glenn, D. E., Hanover, L. N., Beesdo-Baum, K., & Craske, M. G. (2012). A dimensional approach to measuring anxiety for
DSM-5. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatry Research, 21, 258-272.
LeDoux, J. E. (1998). The Emotional Brain. Oxford: Simon and Schuster.


Leon, A. C., Portera, L., & Weissman, M. M. (1995). The social costs of anxiety disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 166 (Suppl. 27), 19–
22.
Lydiard, R. B., Greenwald, S., Weissman, M. M., Johnson, J., Drossman, D. A., & Ballenger, J. C. (1994). Panic disorder and gastrointestinal
symptoms: Findings from the NIMH Epidemiologic Catchment Area project. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 64-70.
Marks, I. M. (1987). Fears, Phobias, and Rituals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Marks, I. M., Swinson, R. P., Basoglu, M., Kuch, K., Noshirvani, H., O'Sullivan, G., ... Wickwire, K. (1993). Alprazolam and exposure alone
and combined in panic disorder with agoraphobia: A controlled study in London and Toronto. British Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 776-
787.
Mavissakalian, M., & Hamann, M. S. (1992). DSM-III personality characteristics of panic disorder with agoraphobia patients in stable
remission. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 33, 305-309.
McCabe, R., & Gifford, S. (2009). Psychological treatment for panic disorder and agoraphobia. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders (pp. 308-320). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McNally, R. J. (1994). Panic Disorder: A Critical Analysis. Oxford: Guilford.
Miller, J. J., Fletcher, K., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (1995). Three-year follow-up and clinical implications of a mindfulness meditation-based stress
reduction intervention in the treatment of anxiety disorders. General Hospital Psychiatry, 17, 192-200.
Milrod, B. L., Busch, F. N., Cooper, A. M., & Shapiro, T. (1997). Manual of Panic-Focused Psychodynamic Psychotherapy. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association.
Milrod, B., Busch, F., Leon, A. C., Shapiro, T., Aronson, A., Roiphe, J., ... Shear, M. K. (2000). Open trial of psychodynamic psychotherapy for
panic disorder: A pilot study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1878-1880.
NICE. (2011). Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Panic Disorder, with and Without Agoraphobia. Management in Primary, Secondary and
Community Care (Clinical Guideline 113). London: Author.


Noyes, R., Jr (2001). Hypochondriasis: Boundaries and comorbidities. In G.J.G. Asmundson, S. Taylor, & B. J. Cox (Eds.), Health Anxiety:
Clinical and Research Perspectives on Hypochondriasis and Related Conditions (pp. 132-160). Chichester: Wiley.
Noyes, R., Jr, Cook, B., Garvey, M., & Summers, R. (1990). Reduction of gastrointestinal symptoms with treatment for panic disorder.
Psychosomatics, 31, 75-79.
Oehrberg, S., Christiansen, P. E., & Behnke, K. (1995). Paroxetine in the treatment of panic disorder: A randomized double-blind placebo-
controlled study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 374-379.
Otto, M. W., Pollack, M. H., Sachs, G. S., Reiter, S. R., Meltzer-Brody, S., & Rosenbaum, J. F. (1993). Discontinuation of benzodiazepine
treatment: Efficacy of cognitive-behaviour therapy for patients with panic disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 1485-1490.
Pannekoek, J. N., van der Werff, S. J., Stein, D. J., & van der Wee, N. J. (2013). Advances in the neuroimaging of panic disorder. Human
Psychopharmacology, 28, 608-611.
Paul, E. D., Johnson, P. L., Shekhar, A., & Lowry, C. A. (2014). The Deakin/Graeff hypothesis: Focus on serotonin inhibition of panic.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Reviews, advance online publication. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.03.010.
Pohl, R., Yeragani, V., Balon, R., & Lycaki, H. (1988). The jitteriness syndrome in panic disorder patients treated with antidepressants.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 49, 100-104.
Pollack, M., & Simon, N. (2009). Pharmacotherapy for panic disorder and agoraphobia. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders (pp. 295-307). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pull, C. B. (2007). Combined pharmacotherapy and cognitive-behavioural therapy for anxiety disorders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry,
20, 30-35.
Rapee, R. M., Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1990). Subject-described features of panic attacks using self-monitoring. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 4, 171-181.


Reiss, S., Peterson, R. A., Taylor, S., Schmidt, N. B., & Weems, C. F. (2008). Anxiety Sensitivity Index Consolidated Test Manual: ASI, ASI-3,
and CASI (Third Edition). Worthington, OH: IDS Publishing.
Roy-Byrne, P., & Cowley, D. (2007). Pharmacological treatments of panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia and
social anxiety disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments that Work (Third Edition, pp. 395-430). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Sánchez-Meca, J., Rosa-Alcázar, A. I., Marín-Martínez, F., & Gómez-Conesa, A. (2010). Psychological treatment of panic disorder with or
without agoraphobia: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 37-50
Sharp, D. M., Power, K. G., Simpson, R. J., Swanson, V., Moodie, E., Anstee, J. A., & Ashford, J. J. (1996). Fluvoxamine, placebo, and cognitive
behaviour therapy used alone and in combination in the treatment of panic disorder and agoraphobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 10,
219-242.
Shear, M. K., Cooper, A. M., Klerman, G. L., Busch, F. N., & Shapiro, T. (1993). A psychodynamic model of panic disorder. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 150, 859-866.
Shear, M. K., Houck, P., Greeno, C., & Masters, S. (2001). Emotion-focused psychotherapy for patients with panic disorder. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1993-1998.
Shear, M. K., & Maser, J. D. (1994). Standardized assessment for panic disorder research: A conference report. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 51, 346-354.
Simon, N. M., & Pollack, M. H. (2000). The current status of the treatment of panic disorder: Pharmacotherapy and cognitive-behavioural
therapy. Psychiatric Annals, 30, 689-696.
Stafrace, S. (1994). Hypnosis in the treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia. Australian Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, 22, 73-86.
Stein, D. J., & Stahl, S. (2000). Serotonin and anxiety: Current models. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 15 (Suppl. 2), S1-S6.


Stein, M. B., Norton, G. R., Walker, J. R., Chartier, M. J., & Graham, R. (2000). Do SSRIs enhance the efficacy of very brief cognitive
behavioural therapy for panic disorder? A pilot study. Psychiatry Research, 94, 191–200.
Stutzman, G. E., & LeDoux, J. E. (1999). GABAergic antagonists block the inhibitory effects of serotonin in the lateral amygdala: A
mechanism for modulation of sensory inputs related to fear conditioning. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, RC8.
Taylor, S. (2000). Understanding and Treating Panic Disorder: Cognitive-Behavioural Approaches. Oxford: Wiley.
Taylor, S. (2001). Breathing retraining in the treatment of panic disorder: Efficacy, caveats, and indications. Scandinavian Journal of
Behaviour Therapy, 30, 1–8.
Taylor, S., Jang, K. L., Stewart, S. H., & Stein, M. B. (2008). Aetiology of the dimensions of anxiety sensitivity: A behavioural-genetic
analysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 899–914
Taylor, S., & Livesley, W. J. (1995). The influence of personality on the clinical course of neurosis. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 8, 93–97.
Taylor, S., Zvolensky, M. J., Cox, B. J., Deacon, B., Heimberg, R. G., Ledley, D. R., ... Cardenas, S. J. (2007). Robust dimensions of anxiety
sensitivity: Development and initial validation of the Anxiety Sensitivity Index-3. Psychological Assessment, 19, 176–188.
Tork, I., & Hornung, J. P. (1990). Raphe nuclei and the serotonergic system. In G. Paxinos (Ed.), The Human Nervous System (pp. 1001–
1022). San Diego: Academic.
Tyrer, P. (1985). Neurosis divisible? Lancet, i, 685–688.
Uhlenhuth, E. H., Balter, M. B., Ban, T. A., & Yang, K. (1999). International study of expert judgment on therapeutic use of
benzodiazepines and other psychotherapeutic medications: IV. Treatments in recommendations for the pharmacotherapy of anxiety
disorders. Depression and Anxiety, 9, 107–116.
Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., Faravelli, C., Greenwald, S., Hai-Gwo, H., ... Yeh, E. K. (1997). The cross-national epidemiology
of panic disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 54, 305–309.


Wiborg, I. M., & Dahl, A. A. (1996). Does brief dynamic psychotherapy reduce the relapse rate of panic disorder? Archives of General
Psychiatry, 53, 689-694.
Wilhelm, F. H., Trabert, W., & Roth, W. T. (2001). Physiological instability in panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. Biological
Psychiatry, 49, 596-605.
Wittchen, H.-U., Nocon, A., Beesdo, K., Pine, D. S., Hofler, M., Lieb, R., & Gloster, A. T. (2008). Agoraphobia and panic: Prospective-
longitudinal relations suggest a rethinking of diagnostic concepts. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 77, 147-157.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1993). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Yeragani, V. K., Pohl, R., Jampala, V. C., Balon, R., Ramesh, C., & Srinivasan, K. (2000). Increased QT variability in patients with panic
disorder and depression. Psychiatry Research, 93, 225-235.
Yonkers, K. A., Zlotnick, C., Allsworth, J., Warshaw, M., Shea, T., & Keller, M. B. (1998). Is the course of panic disorder the same in women
and men? American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 596-602.


Chapter 16 Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Christine Purdon and Brenda Chiang
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-16
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a debilitating problem that can be refractory to treatment. In this chapter we present an overview
of the diagnostic criteria and clinical features of the disorder, its epidemiology and influential theories of OCD. We then present an overview
of assessment and treatment of OCD followed by a case example and a practical exercise. Our goal is to help clinicians recognize that,
armed with a strong case formulation that is fully endorsed by the client, and using empirically supported interventions, OCD becomes very
treatable.
Case example
Martin was a 35-year-old married father of twin boys aged 2 and a girl aged 5. Martin worked for a large company and his wife worked in
the home, having left her management job when the twins were born. Martin's primary obsession was that his finances might not be in
good order. His primary compulsions were checking and reassurance-seeking. Martin reported that his finances were tight but sufficient to
meet their expenses and pay down their debt. However, many times daily the thought "Maybe you won't have enough income to cover your

expenses" would intrude, resulting in a sudden "wave" of panic. He would then feel compelled to check his bank balance and credit card
statements and recalculate his budget. If his wife was available in person or by phone he would ask her what purchases she had made that
day, even if she hadn't left the house or been online since the last time he asked. If she reported that she had bought anything, even a coffee,
he would become plagued with concerns that their spending was out of control and their debt mounting. He asked his wife repeatedly for
reassurance that they could, indeed, live on their monthly income and would constantly ask her to list every expense she might incur in the
next week.

Relevant family history

Martin grew up in a large city with his parents and older brother. His father was a very successful executive in finance and his mother
did not work outside the home. He described his mother as extremely anxious and his father as having uncompromising standards.
Martin described himself as having poor self-confidence and as feeling generally inadequate in comparison to his father. At the time of the
assessment his father's opinion was profoundly influential. For example, Martin was very talented musically and would have chosen a career
in music but his father told him that he couldn't support the decision to embark on such a "frivolous and unstable" career, steering him into
business instead. Martin acquiesced, a decision he regrets. Before they had children Martin and his wife acquired some financial debt. His
father's disapproval was fierce and vocal. The debt remained a source of intense shame for Martin, especially as he had to accept money from
his parents to buy a van after the twins were born. Martin also reported that his parents have never quite fully approved of his wife.

Diagnostic criteria and clinical features
According to the DSM-5 (APA, 2013) obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is diagnosed when obsessions and/or compulsions cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, daily functioning or other life domains, and/or occupy at least 1 hour total per day


(p. 237). This hour need not be consecutive and includes total time spent ruminating about obsessions and performing compulsions. Similar,
but not identical, diagnostic criteria are included in ICD-10 (WHO, 1993). Diagnostic criteria from DSM-5 and ICD-10 are given in Table 16.1.
Table 16.1 Diagnostic criteria for OCD from DSM-5 and ICD-10
DSM-5
ICD-10
A. Presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both: Obsessions are
defined by (1) and (2):
1. Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that
are experienced, at some time during the disturbance,
as intrusive and unwanted, and that in most individuals
cause marked anxiety or distress.
2. The individual attempts to ignore or suppress such
thoughts, urges, or images, or to neutralize them with
some other thought or action (i.e., by performing a
compulsion).
Compulsions are defined by (1) and (2):
1. Repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering,
checking) or mental acts (e.g., praying, counting,
A. Either obsessions or compulsions (or both), present on most
days for a period of at least two weeks.
B. Obsessions (thoughts, ideas or images) and compulsions
(acts) share the following features, all of which must be
present:
1. They are acknowledged as originating in the mind of
the patient, and are not imposed by outside persons or
influences.
2. They are repetitive and unpleasant, and at least one
obsession or compulsion must be present that is
acknowledged as excessive or unreasonable.
3. The subject tries to resist them (but if very long-
standing, resistance to some obsessions or compulsions

repeating words silently) that the individual feels driven
to perform in response to an obsession or according to
rules that must be applied rigidly.
2. The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing
or reducing anxiety or distress, or preventing some
dreaded event or situation; however, these behaviors
or mental acts are not connected in a realistic way with
what they are designed to neutralize or prevent, or are
clearly excessive. Note: Young children may not be able to
articulate the aims of these behaviors or mental acts.
B. The obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming (e.g.,
take more than 1 hour per day) or cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning.
C. The obsessive-compulsive symptoms are not attributable to
the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication) or another medical condition.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms
of another mental disorder (e.g., excessive worries, as in
generalized anxiety disorder; preoccupation with appearance,
may be minimal). At least one obsession or compulsion
must be present which is unsuccessfully resisted.
4. Experiencing the obsessive thought or carrying out the
compulsive act is not in itself pleasurable. (This should
be distinguished from the temporary relief of tension or
anxiety.)
C. The obsessions or compulsions cause distress or interfere
with the subject's social or individual functioning,usually by
wasting time.
D. Not due to other mental disorders, such as schizophrenia and
related disorders, or mood disorders.

as in body dysmorphic disorder; difficulty discarding or
parting with possessions, as in hoarding disorder; hair
pulling, as in trichotillomania [hair-pulling disorder];
skin picking, as in excoriation [skin-picking] disorder;
stereotypies, as in stereotypic movement disorder; ritualized
eating behavior, as in eating disorders; preoccupation with
substances or gambling, as in substance-related and addictive
disorders; preoccupation with having an illness, as in illness
anxiety disorder; sexual urges or fantasies, as in paraphilic
disorders; impulses, as in disruptive, impulse-control, and
conduct disorders; guilty ruminations, as in major depressive
disorder; thought insertion or delusional preoccupations, as
in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders;
or repetitive patterns of behavior, as in autism spectrum
disorder). For specifiers see DSM-5 p. 237.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993, pp. 97–98).
Obsessions are unwanted and intrusive thoughts that are recurrent, persistent, and markedly distressing and are ignored, suppressed, or
neutralized with other thoughts or actions (APA, 2013, p. 235). According to DSM-5 they take the form of verbal thoughts, sensory-based

images or urges/impulses to act. Insight varies from good (person knows for sure the feared outcome will not come true) to delusional
(person is convinced the feared outcome will come true) (Leckman et al., 2010).
Compulsions are repetitive behaviours or mental acts that a person feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to
rigid rules (APA, 2013, p. 235). They are completed to reduce distress evoked by the obsession or to prevent feared outcomes. However, they
are either excessive (i.e. perseverative and performed past the point of functionality) or not connected in a realistic way to the feared event.
In the past it was thought that there was a subtype of people who did not experience compulsions (so-called "pure" obsessionals). However,
once covert rituals (e.g. thinking a "good" thought) and reassurance-seeking were recognized as compulsions, studies found that 100% of
people with obsessions have compulsions (Leonard & Riemann, 2012; Williams et al., 2011).
Ferrao et al. (2012) found that in their sample of over 1,000 people with OCD, 65% reported that their compulsion was preceded by sensory
phenomena (musculoskeletal sensations, internally or externally evoked "just right" perceptions, or urges). These phenomena more often
co-occurred with symmetry/ordering/arranging and contamination/washing symptom dimensions, comorbid Tourette syndrome and a
family history of tic disorders (Ferrao et al., 2012). The presence of sensory phenomena has also been associated with less insight into the
excessive or unrealistic quality of obsessions and compulsions (Moritz et al., 2014).
A number of studies have used factor-analytic strategies to identify symptom clusters based on the content of obsessions and the
compulsive action. The most commonly identified clusters are contamination obsessions with cleaning compulsions, symmetry-based
obsessions with ordering/arranging rituals and repugnant/harm/aggressive/religious obsessions with checking rituals (Leckman et al.,
2010). There is some evidence that although the content of obsessions and compulsions may change across time, the general themes of the
primary obsessions and compulsions do not, particularly contamination obsessions and washing compulsions (Leckman et al., 2010).
However, it is difficult to subtype people according to the content of their obsessions and compulsive actions because people often exhibit
a variety of obsessions and compulsions that cut across subtypes. Leckman et al. (2010) concluded that subtypes of OCD should be based
on severity or symptom endorsement rates rather than subgroups of symptoms (p. 519). Taylor (2011) makes the case for important


differences between early-onset (mean age of 11) and late-onset (mean age of 23) OCD, concluding that early onset OCD is overrepresented
in males, associated with greater severity and symptoms, more likely to be associated with tic disorders, OC spectrum disorders and
personality disorders, and associated with greater prevalence in first-degree relatives.
Epidemiology
Epidemiological data based on DSM-5 criteria for OCD are not yet available, so reported statistics reflect OCD as diagnosed with DSM-IV-TR
(APA, 2000) criteria. OCD has a 1-year prevalence of 0.7-1.8% and a lifetime prevalence of 2-3% with no gender differences. Additionally,
13.5-28.2% of the population experience subclinical OCD in their lifetime (Adam et al., 2012; Ruscio et al., 2010). Overall mean age of onset
is 19.5 years. However, nearly one-quarter of men with OCD report onset before the age of 10. In women, age of onset tends to either be
in adolescence (13-16 years) or in early adulthood (Ruscio et al., 2010). Women are also at increased risk of developing OCD postpartum,
although prevalence rates are unknown (Brandes et al., 2004). There does appear to be a genetic component to OCD, as individuals are at
increased risk of developing the disorder if they have a first-degree relative with OCD, especially early-onset or tic- and ordering-related OCD
(e.g. Taylor, 2011). Finally, the presence of tics, depression and substance use in childhood and early adolescence have been identified as risk
factors for OCD (Fontenelle & Hasler, 2008).
With respect to severity, Ruscio et al. (2010) found that 65.6% of those diagnosed with OCD had moderate symptoms and 30.7% had
severe symptoms, whereas only 3.7% had mild symptoms. People whose symptoms were in the severe range tended to have poorer insight,
more comorbid disorders and greater likelihood of being hospitalized in their lifetime (Ruscio et al., 2010). People with lifetime OCD reported
6 hours per day spent on obsessions and 4.6 hours per day on compulsions in the past year (Ruscio et al., 2010). Impairment usually occurs
across all life domains (Eisen et al., 2006), but individuals with severe symptoms may have even greater interference interpersonal and
social functioning. Individuals with moderately severe symptomatology reported impairment primarily in the home management domain


(Ruscio et al., 2010). In his comprehensive review Moritz (2008) noted that people with OCD tend not to fulfil the potential indicated by
their higher academic achievements, and that 30-60% of people with OCD are unemployed. He concluded that the quality of life for people
with OCD is on par with that of people with schizophrenia. Adam et al. (2012) found that even subclinical symptoms were associated with
increased odds of health care use.
Ruscio et al. (2010) found that comorbid psychological disorders are the norm rather than the exception, as 90% of individuals with a
lifetime prevalence of OCD also met criteria for another disorder. The most frequently identified comorbid difficulties are mood disorders
(63.3-69.0%) and anxiety disorders (66.8-75.8%), including major depressive disorder (40.7-45.4%), social phobia (32.7-43.5%), specific
phobia (28.8-42.7%) and panic disorder (20-23.7%) (Adam et al., 2012; Ruscio et al., 2010). Studies suggest that OCD tends to develop after
most (80%) comorbid anxiety disorders, but tends to follow the development of comorbid mood disorders just as often as it precedes their
onset (Grabe et al., 2001; Ruscio et al., 2010).
Although body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), hoarding disorder, trichotillomania (TTM) and excoriation (skin-picking) disorder have
been identified as obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders in DSM-5, there is limited literature examining the relationship of OCD with
spectrum disorders. Hoarding had previously been considered a symptom of OCD, excoriation disorder did not formally exist, and research
has typically focused on associations with tic and impulse-control disorders. Nevertheless, there appears to be some overlap with BDD and
TTM. Researchers estimate that 34% of individuals with BDD also have OCD, while 8-37% of people with OCD have BDD (Philips, 2000). In a
study by Cohen et al. (1995), 13% of individuals with TTM had previously been formally diagnosed with OCD. However, further studies need
to be conducted in order to understand the relationship between OCD and spectrum disorders as identified by DSM-5 criteria.
Cognitive-behavioural theory of OCD
The cognitive-behavioural theory (CBT) of OCD is currently the most influential model and the one on which CBT treatment is based. The


effectiveness of CBT for OCD is supported by many treatment outcome studies (Abramowitz et al., 2009; Franklin & Foa, 2007; Williams et
al., 2012). For a comprehensive review of the CBT model of OCD see Purdon (2009). The CBT model is grounded in Beck's general cognitive
model and was initially developed by Rachman (1997, 1998) and Salkovskis (1985, 1989, 1999). According to the CBT model, obsessional
thoughts are appraised as signifying harm or danger and as requiring immediate action, both to ameliorate the distress evoked by the
negative appraisal and to ascertain that the harm or negative consequences of the obsessional thought itself and/or the idea of harm/
consequences it bespeaks has not or will not occur.
Ameliorative strategies reduce distress (or at least are perceived to result in less distress than if nothing was done) which serves as
negative reinforcement for the act and increases the likelihood that it will be repeated when the obsession occurs again (Foa & Tillmans,
1980; Rachman, 1976, 1997, 1998; Rachman & Hodgson, 1980; Salkovskis, 1999). The non-occurrence of the event the obsession portends is
taken as evidence that the compulsion is successful (Salkovskis, 1999). Furthermore, it terminates exposure to the obsession so the distress
does not extinguish. Thus, no new learning about the obsessional thought's actual meaning is possible. Over time the obsessional thought
increases in frequency and intensity and the compulsion becomes a reflexive means of managing distress associated with the obsessional
thought.
Memory confidence has recently been identified as a key factor in the persistence of checking compulsions (Rachman, 2002). There
is a growing body of work which suggests that lack of confidence in memory, sensory and cognitive faculties motivates repetition of
compulsions and that, ironically, repetition of rituals erodes this confidence further. Recent research suggests that these effects may apply
to washing compulsions as well. A number of studies have found that individuals with OCD have less confidence in their memory, cognitive
and sensory faculties overall than do individuals with another psychiatric diagnosis or individuals with no diagnosis (Hermans et al., 2003;
Nedeljkovic & Kyrios, 2007; Nedeljkovic et al., 2009; van den Hout et al., 2008), particularly when referencing OCD-relevant actions such
as locking a door (Hermans et al., 2003). Meanwhile, repeating an act degrades memory, sensory and cognitive confidence in as few as
five repetitions, even though actual memory is intact (Coles et al., 2006; Fowle & Boschen, 2011; Radomsky et al., 2006; van den Hout &

Kindt, 2003). This effect is especially pronounced under conditions of high responsibility and on tasks relevant to current goals (Boschen &
Vuksanovic, 2007; Radomsky et al., 2014).
In order to prevent activation of the obsessive-compulsive cycle, people engage in overt avoidance (e.g. of stimuli that trigger the
obsession) and covert avoidance (e.g. thought suppression). Thought suppression may result in a paradoxical increase in thought frequency
(Rachman, 1997, 1998; Salkovskis, 1999) or at the very least, failures in thought control may intensify appraisals about the thought's
meaning (Purdon et al., 2005). Finally, thought suppression requires hypervigilance to thought occurrences, increasing the salience of
thought-relevant cues and therefore thought occurrences (e.g. Salkovskis, 1999).
Beliefs and appraisal
Beliefs and appraisal may derive from, or reflect schema about the self, the world and the future. Purdon and Clark (1999) argued that
obsessions that threaten the self-view are more likely to capture attention. The majority of individuals assimilate obsessional thoughts into
the self-view ("even a person like me can have a thought like this"). People prone to developing obsessional thoughts, though, may modify
the self-view to accommodate the thought ("maybe I am a homicidal maniac at heart"). Certainly research suggests that obsessions that
contradict valued aspects of the self are more distressing (Rowa et al., 2005), and people with OCD tend to exhibit ambivalent core beliefs (e.g.
"Maybe I am incompetent"; Bhar & Kyrios, 2007). This in turn may result in a preoccupation with information relevant to the status of the
self-view as well as producing uncertainty and doubt about the meaning of that information.
The Obsessive-Compulsive Cognitions Working Group (OCCWG; Steketee et al., 2003) determined that three types of appraisal and beliefs
are unique to OCD, including responsibility, over-importance of thoughts and thought control. The OCCWG also identified three categories of
appraisal and beliefs that, although not unique to OCD, play an important role in its development and persistence. These are: perfectionism,
overestimation of threat and intolerance of uncertainty. These appraisals will be described in turn.


Responsibility
Salkovskis's model (1985, 1989, 1999; Salkovskis et al., 1995) proposed that obsessions develop when normal thoughts activate overvalued
beliefs about one's responsibility to protect oneself and others from harm. Examples include "Failing to prevent (or failing to try to prevent)
harm to self or others is the same as having caused the harm in the first place," "Responsibility is not attenuated by other factors (e.g.
low probability of occurrence)," "Not neutralizing when an intrusion has occurred is similar or equivalent to seeking or wanting the harm
involved in that intrusion to happen" (Salkovskis, 1985, p. 579). Martin endorsed many of these general beliefs. When his obsession occurred
he reported having appraisals such as "It would be immoral for me to ignore this thought," "I must be 100% certain my expenses do not
outweigh my income," and "This must be dealt with NOW, before anything else."
Importance of thoughts
Rachman (1998) introduced the idea of "thought action fusion" to describe the beliefs that: (1) having an unacceptable thought increases
the likelihood of the negative event represented in the thought coming true; and (2) that having a morally repugnant thought is the moral
equivalent to committing a morally repugnant deed. This overemphasis on the thought's meaning also manifests in beliefs that "obsessional
thoughts indicate something significant about oneself (e.g. that one is terrible, weird, abnormal)" and "negative intrusive thoughts must be
important merely because they have occurred" (Thordarson & Shafran, 2002, p. 15).
Examples include: "This thought reflects my true evil nature," "having this thought means I am a bad person," "if I think this, I must
really want it to happen," "thinking this can make the event more likely to happen," "if others knew I thought this, they would think I am
an evil person," and "having this thought means I am likely to lose control over my mind or my behaviour" (Rachman, 1997, p. 793). Martin
believed that the idea that his finances might be in peril would not occur unless there was some truth to it, either signalling something he
had forgotten or neglected or serving as a prophetic warning sign. He also believed that he and his wife possessed personality characteristics

that potentiated irresponsible accrual of debt. Thus, when he had the obsession he had appraisals such as “I wouldn’t be having this thought
unless it was telling me something important,” “Maybe I am a bad person who can’t manage his finances.”
Mental control
This refers to “over-evaluation of the importance of exerting complete control over intrusive thoughts, images or impulses, and the belief
that this is both possible and desirable” (Purdon & Clark, 2002, p. 37). Examples of such beliefs include: “I would be a better person if I gained
more control over my thoughts,” “if I exercise enough willpower, I should be able to gain complete control over my mind,” and “Being unable
to control unwanted thoughts will make me physically ill.” Martin often tried to avoid having his obsession, particularly after he had done
his compulsion, but found it would return anyway. Martin appraised its recurrence as further evidence of his weakness of character and
inability to keep control over important matters.
Overestimation of threat
Overestimation of threat refers to the overestimation of the severity and/or the likelihood of negative events (Steketee et al., 1998). Examples
of such beliefs, as summarized by Sookman and Pinard (2002, p. 64), include “I believe that the world is a dangerous place,” “Bad things are
more likely to happen to me than to other people” and “When anything goes wrong in my life, it is likely to have terrible effects.” Martin
believed that his family was more likely to inadvertently overspend when he was in charge of the budget. He also tended to overestimate the
probability of overspending.
Intolerance of uncertainty
Intolerance of uncertainty is reflected in beliefs such as “If I am uncertain, there is something wrong with me,” “If I’m not absolutely sure
of something, I’m bound to make a mistake,” and “It is essential for me to consider all the possible outcomes of a situation.” When Martin

had the obsession, he found the uncertainty impossible to tolerate and would seek certainty that his finances were in order immediately
and at the expense of other tasks. He also contrasted his feelings of uncertainty with his father's overwhelming confidence, interpreting his
uncertainty to be a sign of weakness.
Perfectionism
Steketee (1999) defined perfectionism as the "tendency to believe that there is a perfect solution to problems, that doing something without
mistakes is possible and desirable and that even minor errors will have serious consequences" (p. 146). Examples of such beliefs as they
pertain to OCD include "In order to be a worthwhile person, I must be perfect at everything I do," "If I fail at something then I am a failure
as a person," "I must keep working at something until it is done exactly right," "There is only one right way to do things," and "Even minor
mistakes mean a job is not complete." Martin believed that there was only one way to manage expenses, and that was his father's way. He also
believed that even the smallest error in his financial calculations bespoke incompetence and weakness of character, and also significantly
jeopardized his family's well-being.
Empirical evidence for CBT theory
The CBT model has received considerable empirical support. It is well accepted that compulsions result in relief (or at least less distress than
if the compulsion is prohibited) which in turn serves as negative reinforcement for their repetition (e.g. Rachman & Hodgson, 1980). People
with OCD do tend to report more strongly held beliefs in the six domains specified earlier (Taylor et al., 2009). There is a subset of individuals
who report low levels of obsessional beliefs on self-report measures. This has led some to suggest that the cognitive model inadequately
explains all presentations of OCD (Taylor et al., 2009). However, one belief, held strongly, may well produce an aversive emotional response to
an obsession and a subsequent need to ameliorate that state with a compulsion. Such a person would score low on self-report measures but
exhibit clinically significant symptoms. There are also people who experience a visceral disgust or a "not just right" feeling in response to the

obsession rather than fear/anxiety that it signifies harm. In such cases beliefs about the obsession may be less important and salient than the
perceived urgent need to conduct the compulsion to terminate discomfort. Regardless, the reinforcing properties of the compulsion are still
a key factor in their persistence.
Assessment of OCD
It is important to keep in mind that people may not be comfortable reporting on the content of their obsessions and/or the extent and nature
of their rituals due to embarrassment, fear of involvement with the authorities (e.g. if the obsessions are violent or repugnant or the rituals
affect the children in the home) and fear that saying obsessions aloud may cause them to come true. People also may engage in compulsions
that they do not recognize as such. Some good preliminary or supplementary questions to ask are:
• Do you tend to use a lot of hot water in the shower?
• Does cleaning take you a lot longer than it does other people you know?
• Do you tend to use a lot of soap and/or hand sanitizer?
• Does it take you a long time to leave the house?
• Does it take you a long time to check everything before going to bed?
• Do you have thoughts that you have to "undo," suppress or "correct"?
Another helpful strategy is to normalize obsessional thoughts, noting that the vast majority of people experience unwanted, repetitive
thoughts, including highly repugnant ones (e.g. Purdon & Clark, 1993; Rachman & de Silva, 1978).
To establish diagnosis, structured interviews are the gold standard. However, if there is limited time available and only a quick OCD
screener can be conducted, clinicians can opt to use previously developed screening instruments. NICE (2005) guidelines recommend


the Zohar-Fineberg Obsessive Compulsive Screen (Z-FOCS), which consists of five questions, has good psychometric properties and can be
administered in 1 minute (Fineberg et al., 2008). The most widely used diagnostic interviews are the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5
(SCID-5; First et al., 2015) and the Mini Neuropsychiatric Interview for DSM-5 (M.I.N.I. 7.0; Sheehan, 2014). The M.I.N.I. takes considerably
less time than the SCID and has excellent reliability. If time is quite limited the OCD modules from either can be used on their own to
establish diagnostic status.
There are numerous symptom severity measures of which Grabill et al. (2008) provide an excellent comprehensive review. We tend to
favour the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS; Goodman et al., 1989a, 1989b) as it readily identifies the range of symptoms,
target symptoms and level of insight, has well-established norms, and is sensitive to pre-treatment and post-treatment symptom changes.
The self-report version of the measure has shown good consistency with the interviewer-administered version (Frederici et al., 2010).
Given the degree of comorbidity with depression and the potential of depression to compromise motivation, it is advised that depressive
symptoms be assessed. The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996) is an obvious choice. To gain an understanding of the
beliefs driving the obsessive-compulsive cycle, we use the 44-item version of the Obsessive Beliefs Questionnaire (OBQ-44; Steketee et al.,
2005).
In Martin's case, assessment involved a family and social history and administration of the Y-BOCS, the BDI-II and the OBQ. Martin's score
on the Y-BOCS was 27, which is in the low end of the "severe" range. His BDI-II score was 11, which is at the low end of the "mild" range,
consistent with the diagnostic determination that he did not meet criteria for depression. On the OBQ Martin exhibited elevated beliefs in
all domains. Martin had good insight into the excessiveness of his reassurance-seeking and checking rituals noting that he was "driving his
wife crazy" and that his obsessional preoccupations kept him in an unnecessary, constant state of high anxiety, guilt and shame. He had no
other clinically significant diagnoses.
Once diagnosis and severity have been assessed it is absolutely essential to develop an idiosyncratic case formulation. A good formulation
explicates the internal logic of the obsessive-compulsive cycle, is collaboratively derived, creates a simple (but not simplistic) model to


explain a complex experience, and helps the person develop a more compassionate understanding of their symptoms and of themselves
(Padesky & Greenberger, 1995) The mechanisms that maintain the symptoms are the identified culprits against which the client and
therapist ally in therapy. In OCD the formulation needs to explain what is meaningful about the obsessional concern (that is, why it captures
and holds attention in the first place), why it evokes the aversive emotional response/distress and why the compulsions are repeated both
within and across episodes.
To accomplish this, it is useful to have the client keep a diary record of their obsessions and compulsions for a week. Drawing from the
nomothetic model of OCD, the client should record the content and form of the obsessional thought (thought, image, impulse, doubt), the
personal meaning and importance of the obsession, the range of emotions it evoked and the coping strategies used to manage that distress,
with particular focus on the compulsions. Clients should report on how often they repeat their compulsions within the episode and how
successful the compulsions were in achieving their goal. They should also report on the impact of repetition on memory and sensory
confidence. Using this data as a guide, the therapist and client can together conduct a detailed cognitive-behaviour assessment of the client's
OCD with the goal of developing a strong working case formulation.
Martin's case formulation
Martin had recently become the sole breadwinner, so the thought that he hadn't enough money to meet expenses was very salient.
Furthermore, in Martin's family of origin poor financial management was viewed as shameful. Meanwhile, Martin's own sense of self-worth
was largely informed by his father's approval, but he had already incurred his father's disapproval by being in debt and by not marrying the
right person from the right family. Thus, the thought was a threat to his goals to provide for his family, to make good decisions, and to feel
worthy and competent. Finally, like many people with OCD, Martin appeared to have an ambivalent sense of self. That is, rather than having
a stable self-view as expressed through unqualified core beliefs ("I am competent"), Martin's core beliefs were more qualified, expressed as
"Maybe I'm incompetent." Information relevant to this perpetual question of self-worth had high attentional priority.

Once the obsessional thought captured Martin's attention, he appraised it as meaningful and important. He would reference the fact
that he and his wife had incurred debt early in their marriage, as well as his father's view that debt was an indication of incompetence
and weakness. He also referenced his parents' disapproval of his wife and her family. Thus he accepted the idea that he and his wife may
possess character flaws (e.g. irresponsibility) that potentiated accrual of debt, and so the thought signalled genuine potential threat. Second,
incurring more debt would incur his father's wrath and disapproval. The thought, then, evoked considerable anxiety, shame and fear that he
was highly motivated to ameliorate.
Martin did not tend to resist the obsessional concern because he found it very difficult to tolerate the feelings of shame and uncertainty
it evoked. He also thought it was immoral and irresponsible to ignore thoughts signalling potential harm, particularly about finances. He
would quickly act on the thought by seeking reassurance from his wife and/or would check his expenses against his income. Often this
would afford him some relief. However, if it didn't he would repeat the calculations, which tended to cause him to begin to doubt whether
he was seeing the numbers properly and had calculated accurately. In between checking episodes his mind ran a "subprogram" to identify
reasons as to why the calculations may have been off. Once he identified such a reason (e.g. maybe his wife forgot to tell him about an
expense) it would trigger the obsession and evoke the compulsion. These compulsions persisted, ironically, both because of the relief they
often afforded (intermittent reinforcement schedule) and because of the doubt their repetition introduced.
Treatment
According to NICE (2005) and APA (2007) guidelines, the psychological treatment of choice for OCD is CBT which includes exposure with
response prevention (ERP). Exposure with response prevention refers to exposure to the obsession while the compulsive ritual is prohibited.
Together, the negative appraisal of the thought's meaning is addressed via standard cognitive restructuring techniques and behavioural
experiments while the aversive emotional response to the obsession is extinguished through ERP.

The NICE guidelines recommend a stepped approach such that milder cases receive a brief course of CBT+ERP (10 therapy hours or less)
with structured self-help materials or telephone contact with a therapist, or receive group treatment. For people who fail to benefit from
such low-intensity approaches and for those with more severe symptoms a choice of either more intensive CBT+ERP (10+ therapist hours) or
a course of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) is recommended. When symptoms are so severe that the person is unable to leave
the house, telephone sessions are recommended.
It is highly likely that family members become involved in the client's compulsive rituals (for a review see Purdon, 2012). Family members
may provide reassurance and engage in safety, checking and avoidance rituals and it is thus recommended that family members be involved
in treatment. They need to be given a clear understanding of the rationale for the treatment and of reassurance-seeking, safety behaviours
and avoidance, and be given clear instructions on how to respond when the client is doing exposure at home. It is useful to encourage the
client to allow key family members to meet with the therapist (with the client present) to review the basic case formulation, treatment
rationale and their role. Family members should be discouraged from being complicit in rituals but without taking a mocking, critical or
harsh tone which tends to exacerbate rituals (Amir et al., 2000), instead being firm but supportive (e.g. "You are asking me for reassurance
and we have agreed that it doesn't help you overcome your OCD for me to provide it; I know you are strong, you are doing great, you can ride
through the anxiety, I have confidence in you."). Family members can also be given basic instruction in ERP and can coach clients in between
sessions. Van Noppen and Steketee (2003) and Renshaw et al. (2005) advocate for a multifamily behavioural treatment in which family
members are trained in exposure to rituals, contract to improve communication in the family, and reduce hostile and antagonistic responses
to OCD. Guidelines for this approach are outlined in the respective papers.
Cognitive behavioural treatment of OCD
The first phase of treatment involves identification of the specific targets of treatment, or the culprits, presenting the treatment plan and

setting the stage for treatment. In Martin's case we identified four culprits:
1. Appraisal of the obsessional concern as meaningful and important
2. Repeated checking and reassurance
3. Intolerance of uncertainty
4. Ambivalent sense of self.
The treatment plan, then, would target the first three culprits in tandem using psychoeducation (e.g. about thought control, memory
confidence), standard cognitive restructuring techniques, behavioural experiments and ERP. Once Martin acquired new learning about
the meaning and importance of his obsessional concern, and the subsequent need to conduct the compulsion, we would use behavioural
experiments and continua to address the ambivalent sense of self.
Setting the stage for treatment
Cognitive behaviour therapy of OCD requires people to refrain from the strategies they have used to cope with distress and which they
believe serve to prevent harm. Unless the rationale for this is obvious and compelling people simply will refuse treatment, drop out, or
continue with treatment while avoiding its anxiety-evoking elements (e.g. Maltby & Tolin, 2003; Vogel et al., 2004). Avoidance strategies and
compulsions advance valued goals (e.g. to protect the family from harm, to prevent sin, to be a good parent) and many clients may fear that
treatment will require that they work against these goals. Once the formulation has been developed, we find it useful to identify the valued
aspects of self or important goals that are being advanced by the compulsions (x) and those that are being compromised by the compulsions
(y). The former can be understood as an important reason that the compulsions developed and persist, whereas the latter is the reason the

client has crossed your threshold. The overall goal of treatment is to help the client advance y without compromising x. The use of a two-
dimensional continua in this manner is based on Egan et al.'s (2014) cognitive-behavioural treatment of perfectionism.
In Martin's case, the compulsions promoted his goals of protecting his family from financial harm and maintaining a sense of worth as a
person. However, these goals were being advanced at the expense of his goals to be a supportive and loving husband, successful at his job and
happy. Martin and I drew a graph with two axes, each 0-100 units and intersecting at 50. The x-axis represented his progress in meeting his
x goals and the y axis his progress on the y goals. Martin plotted his coordinates at (60, 30).
Once we were in agreement as to what the culprits were and how they compromised valued goals, we discussed the fact that treatment
involved taking risks. These risks included not engaging the OCD "voice" (thereby risking ignoring a genuine threat), terminating
ameliorative strategies before achieving a sense of certainty, and tolerating the ensuing doubt (thereby risking that harm may have, or could
in future, occur). The goal of treatment was to thus to help Martin learn to take the same acceptable risks that people without OCD take, and
that he himself takes on matters outside his obsessional concerns.
We also discussed the fact that people with OCD tend to overestimate risk, particularly when they are the ones responsible for the
outcome, and feel a moral imperative to prevent that harm, no matter how small its probability. We had Martin estimate the probability that
at that moment in time his expenses outweighed his income. Martin reasoned that for this to happen: (1) his wife would have had to have
spent more than $300 in the past week; (2) he would have to have miscalculated their income; and (3) there would have had to be expenses he
didn't know about. Martin's estimations of each event were .08, .10 and .05, respectively. Thus the probability of his feared event happening
was .08 × .10 × .05 = .0004; the chance that the event would not happen was 99.96%. Yet the probability that he was compromising
important goals in the service of assuring himself that an event of minute probability had not occurred was 100%. We discussed the
probability that he could have gotten into a bad car accident on his way to the office. Martin estimated it to be about 2%, but said it was
negligible compared to the inconvenience of not driving. We discussed this as an example of how he takes fully acceptable, normal risks on


a daily basis. He felt no moral imperative to stop driving even though it is more risky. Thus, there also may not be a moral imperative to act
on the obsessional thought.
Active treatment
The initial goals of active treatment are to: (1) consolidate the client's understanding of the role of appraisal in driving the system; (2)
recognize the utility of evaluating that appraisal; (3) identify the client's implicit prioritization of goals (that is, advancing x at the expense
of y); (4) recognize the merits of being aware of all relevant goals and being flexible in prioritizing them; (5) develop the client's skill at
identifying and weighing hot thoughts; and (6) extinguish the fear of/evoked by the obsession.
To start, we reviewed Martin's diary from the previous week and he identified the "culprits" at work. I introduced the concept of "hot
thoughts" about his obsessions and compulsions, and we discussed the kinds of questions to ask in order to identify them. These included:
"What does this obsession mean about my personality or character?"; "What does it mean that the obsession keeps coming back?" and
"What does it mean about me if I do not do my compulsion/avoidance/suppression or quit before I'm certain?" The appraisals "It is wrong,
morally, to ignore this thought" and "It is irresponsible to stop these calculations before I am certain they are correct" were clearly Martin's
hot thoughts.
Finally, we discussed how Martin evaluated how well he was meeting his x goals of keeping financially sound and maintaining his self-
worth. It turned out that the primary and almost sole criterion was how well he monitored his finances. We discussed other factors relevant
to the x goals, such as his expertise and conscientiousness, and being a loving parent. Next we looked at Martin's coordinates on the goals and
values graph. Martin was asked whether refraining from asking his wife for reassurance half the time would produce a meaningful decrease
in progress towards his x goals. Martin did not think so, particularly in light of the other factors that he now recognized contribute to those. I
then asked if reducing reassurance would produce a meaningful increase in his y goals. Martin said absolutely, probably by 10 units. He then
plotted his new coordinates. I asked if he would be willing to do a behavioural experiment in which he cut back his reassurance-seeking by


at least half this week and plotted his coordinates daily. We also agreed that he would continue to complete his diary with an emphasis on
identifying the hot thoughts.
In the next 7 weeks of treatment we continued to identify and discuss Martin's appraisal of his obsessional concerns while reducing his
compulsions and reassurance-seeking through behavioural experiments and ERP. Our ultimate goal was to help Martin develop a defiant
and airtight stance against the OCD: "Yes, OCD, you might be right, I might be running further into debt, but probably not, so I am going to
accept that risk and just get on with the immediate and important things I know need my attention right now rather than checking my bank
balance."
Exposure with response prevention
In ERP, the obsession is evoked and the person is prohibited from conducting the compulsion. Once the distress declines substantially the
process is repeated until the obsession causes little to no distress. ERP can appear deceptively simple. Therapists often simply expose the
person to any and all stimuli that make them uncomfortable. However, this can miss the point entirely. We have worked with heterosexual
clients who have had unsuccessful courses of ERP for obsessional doubt about their sexuality ("Maybe I'm gay"). In all cases the clients
avoided naked images of same-sex people, and in all cases the therapist insisted that they expose themselves to gay/lesbian pornography
until the images did not evoke any aversive emotional response. However, in no case was gay/lesbian pornography the primary fear; the gay/
lesbian pornography triggered the obsession and was thus disliked and avoided, just as the person phobic of dogs might dislike and avoid
a dog park. The target of exposure should be to dogs, not dog parks. The primary fear for our OCD clients was that the thought "Maybe I'm
gay" signalled something important and meaningful about sexual orientation which in turn meant that their heterosexual relationships
were fraudulent. We thus had the clients experience the doubt about being gay and sit with the uncertainty rather than trying to resolve it.
If required, we used stimuli to evoke the obsession (e.g. pictures of same-sex people) but extinction was to the obsession, not the stimuli.


The case formulation is of central importance in determining what to expose the client to and in what order. The therapist must first
ask "What does the client need to achieve new learning about?" According to our case formulation, Martin needed to achieve new learning
about the obsession: Did it truly signal imminent and clear danger and required action? Did he have a moral imperative to drop everything
to prevent that danger? Would his distress truly not dissipate unless he did his compulsions? The next question in ERP is where to start. It
is often advised that the client develop an exposure hierarchy starting with stimuli/situations that cause moderate distress and ending with
those most feared. One downside of this approach is that, at least initially, the prospect of having to confront the dreaded situation at the
top of the hierarchy can reduce motivation to progress ("if I do step 4 this week I'll have to do that last step in just a couple of weeks!"). We
have found it more useful to identify the factors that influence distress and simply work with the client to use these as a template. Also, in
traditional approaches to ERP all safety behaviours are prohibited (Foa & Kozak, 1986). This can make exposure very difficult for many to
accept. More recently it has been argued that judicious use of safety behaviours does not impair extinction and may in fact reduce treatment
fears (e.g. Milosevic & Radomsky, 2013a, 2013b). Safety behaviours can be worked into an exposure hierarchy or template (e.g. touch the
floor with thick gloves, then thin gloves, then a Kleenex, then the bare hand).
Like any between-session work it is important that ERP be conducted collaboratively and with clear and specific goals (see Padesky &
Greenberger, 1995). The therapist is well advised to conduct exposure in session so the client knows what to do between sessions. In session,
the therapist serves as a coach and facilitator. It is useful to revisit the values and goals graph to help the client recognize what goals will
be advanced by overcoming the compulsions and, realistically, how much failing to do the compulsion will compromise the goals served by
the compulsions. Prior to beginning exposure the ground rules should be established. The first important rule is that the client is in control
of the pacing and timing. The therapist and client spell out what will be done and the therapist neither forces the client to do anything nor
springs any surprises. The second rule is that the client refrains from compensating for the exposure later (e.g. by doing extra rituals once
home). Open communication and collaboration will be facilitated by clarity about how exposure will target key culprits.


When commencing exposure the therapist should model the desired behaviour first. This makes the exercise clear, models a non-anxious
response to the behaviour and enhances the alliance. During exposure, the therapist is warm and supportive, using statements such as
"You're doing a really good job" and "If you can hang in a bit longer this is going to pay off even more." The therapist asks the client to report
on her/his distress level using whatever scale works best for the client. The therapist should watch the client's body language to gauge when
distress is increasing or decreasing and ask for ratings accordingly. ERP can also provide a rich environment in which to identify the key
cognitive culprit appraisals in action, so when distress increases the therapist can ask what thoughts were going through the client's head.
Once the situation/stimulus results in significantly less distress the challenge can be increased.
When the exercise is over the therapist and client should evaluate the initial predictions in light of what actually happened and discuss
what that means about the appraisal of the obsession and the perceived need to do the compulsion. Finally, you and the client should plan
between-session exposure sessions. You should leave ample time to do this so that it can be developed collaboratively, the point of the
exercise made clearly (that is, what idea is being tested) and to discuss practical considerations. Research shows that massed exposure is
more effective than spaced (10 times per week is much more effective than 10 times in 10 weeks; Antony & Swinson, 2000). The client should
thus conduct at least one exposure per day. You and the client should also plan how to increase the challenge throughout the week. When
the client returns for the next session it is imperative that the first part of the session process the between-session work: what was done and
what was learned from it? The session then builds on that new learning.
If family members are involved in the compulsions that have been targeted in ERP, it is useful to have them join you with the client for
a session. The goal is to help family members better understand why the compulsions persist and the role of ERP in treating them. The
therapist and family members can discuss how best to support the client through ERP. A key reason why family members participate in
rituals is that they find it difficult to see their loved ones suffer. It can be helpful to provide psychoeducation about extinction and frame ERP
as "short-term pain for long-term gain."

When Martin began ERP, he did not feel he could refrain from doing his expense calculations altogether. We agreed, then, that he would
do his calculations once in response to the obsession and endure the feelings of uncertainty without giving into the urge to repeat the
calculations within that episode. In the first week Martin reported that he had found it difficult to resist repeating the calculations when his
uncertainty was high. We did a behavioural experiment in session in which Martin repeated his calculations once, three times and six times,
rating how certain he felt after each bout. We learned that certainty decreased across repetitions.
Armed with this new learning Martin did the same exposure task for the next week. He found it easier to resist the urge to repeat and his
distress resolved within half an hour, contrary to his prediction that it would last all day. Meanwhile, Martin continued to reduce seeking
reassurance from his wife and found that they had fewer arguments. We had his wife join us for part of a session and apprised her of our
understanding of the OCD model and the role of his reassurance-seeking in its persistence. We discussed ways that she could support Martin
without providing reassurance. She and Martin agreed that they would discuss household expenses once per week within the context of
preparing their weekly budget and if he asked for reassurance outside that she would simply say "You are asking me for reassurance and we
agreed that it is not helpful for me to provide you with it."
Cognitive restructuring
Salkovskis states that the goal of cognitive restructuring is for the "patient and therapist to work together to construct and test a new, less
threatening explanation of the patient's experience, and then to explicitly examine the validity of the contrasting accounts" (Salkovskis,
1999, p. S36). As in ERP the therapist must be very mindful of what, exactly, to target in cognitive restructuring. The most important rule
is that the content of the obsession, and the probability of the feared event, are NOT the targets for cognitive restructuring. Rather, the
appraisal of the obsession which gives rise to the distress, the perceived need to take immediate action, and the intolerance of uncertainty
are. We once worked with a 30-year-old man who had previously had a severe and intractable bladder infection that interfered with his
ability to work for over a year. He subsequently developed contamination fears around contracting another infection. A previous therapist

(who was a certified CBT therapist, no less) asked the client what would be the worst outcome of an infection. The client replied that it would
be the need for a colostomy. The therapist proceeded to target his fear of having to get a colostomy, deeming it as dysfunctional ("What is so
bad about that?"). The client dropped out of treatment.
The culprit in OCD is not fear of something terrible happening to oneself or a loved one, but rather the ideas that the thought is the vector
through which harm will occur, that immediate action is required no matter how minute the probability of harm, and that it is morally
imperative to perform the compulsion and achieve certainty. In case of the client just described the culprits were the ambivalent core belief
that he may be a weak and ineffectual person, appraisals such as "as long as the risk of contracting infection is not zero I must guard against
it" and intolerance of uncertainty. With appropriately targeted cognitive restructuring the client improved dramatically.
As in cognitive interventions for any other type of problem, the crux of change is in the client's ability to generate alternative ways
of viewing a problem or thinking about a situation. The therapist's role is to facilitate insight through guided discovery, not to provide
alternative and more constructive ways of viewing anxiety-provoking stimuli and situations (Padesky & Greenberger, 1995). If the therapist
provides alternative and more optimistic ways of viewing a problem or thinking about situations, clients will be thinking "She's my
therapist, she has to say that" and "But he doesn't know all the bad stuff about me!" Although it may take considerably longer for the client
to produce alternative explanations and balanced alternatives to OCD-related thoughts, therapy will ultimately be more efficient.
Between sessions 3 and 7 Martin developed his ability to identify hot thoughts in the moment and then to weigh evidence for and against
them. By session 8 he began to conclude that the evidence that came to mind that supported the hot thought (e.g. that he and his wife had
been in debt and were thus irresponsible and debt-prone) was not valid in his current life context. He subsequently began to believe that the
obsessional ideas themselves were not valid and therefore that they required no action. He reduced the calculations to once a day and then
finally just once per week, within the context of determining the weekly budget. He cut out reassurance-seeking altogether.
In the final stage of our treatment with Martin we addressed his self-view, "Maybe I'm incompetent." We first identified the qualities that
contribute to competence. Martin initially viewed financial well-being as the only important index of competence but was gradually able to

recognize other relevant qualities (e.g. being organized and efficient at work, managing a household well). We drew a line anchored at the
left by "least competent person" and at the right by "most competent person." Martin identified people who belonged at each end, putting
Hitler on the left and Mother Teresa on the right. He then identified people he knew who would fall towards the left and right anchors. Martin
placed a co-worker whose lack of initiative and knowledge created a lot of work for others on the left and the leader of his church on the right.
We then plotted his friends, then his wife and then his father.
Finally, we plotted where Martin stood. Martin was surprised to find that his spot on the line was quite close to his father's. That is, that
he was not as inferior to his father as he had implicitly viewed himself to be. Martin's task for the next 3 weeks was to recognize and record
indications of his competence and bring a broad range of information to bear on that judgement. Martin soon recognized that he tended to
ignore or discount indications of competence. Over the final three sessions his self-view moved towards "I am competent." At the last session
we plotted his coordinates on the values and goals graph. Martin put these at (75, 70), noting that he realized he would never reach 100 on
either and joking that if he did he wouldn't have much left to strive for in life.
At the end of treatment, Martin's Y-BOCS score was 14, his OBQ score was within the nonclinical range and his BDI-II score was 6. His
obsessional thoughts occurred much less often and with less intensity, and he was able to resist acting on them most of the time. He also
found himself better able to assert himself with his family and support his wife when his parents undermined her. He has returned for
booster sessions every few months but has maintained all treatment gains 1 year later.
Neurobiological theories and pharmacological treatment of OCD
Pharmacological treatment of OCD with SSRIs is based on neurobiological conceptualizations of the disorder. There are three main,
interrelated theories about the biological basis for OCD. These point to genetic factors, structural and functional abnormalities within

the cortico-basal-ganglia-thalamo-cortical (CBGTC) circuitry, and dysregulation of serotonin and other neurotransmission systems as
important in the aetiology of OCD (Storch & McKay, 2014).
The genetic hypothesis proposes that a predisposition to OCD is inherited and the condition develops in individuals exposed to particular
environmental conditions, probably involving particular parenting styles, stressful life events or infections. Available evidence indicates
that genetic factors contribute to the aetiology of OCD (Taylor, 2014). The mode of transmission is probably polygenetic.
The CBGTC hypothesis proposes that structural or functional abnormalities in the CBGTC circuitry subserves the symptoms of OCD. The
CBGTC circuits link the basal ganglia, the prefrontal cortex (particularly orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate regions) and the thalamus.
The hypothesis proposes that overactivity of the prefrontal cortex and thalamus subserves the initiation and maintenance of obsessional
worrying, and overactivity of the basal ganglia subserves stereotyped compulsive behaviour patterns typical of people with OCD. Six lines
of research support this theory (Lapidus et al., 2014; Maia et al., 2008). First, surgical disruption of the CBGTC circuit alleviates chronic OCD
in adults. Second, OCD often develops in individuals who sustain damage to the basal ganglia due to head injury or stroke. Third, there is a
high incidence of OCD in diseases associated with damage to the basal ganglia including Sydenham's chorea, Huntington's chorea, Wilson's
disease and Parkinson's disease. Fourth, OCD and related conditions, including tic disorders, sometimes develop as a consequence of an
autoimmune reaction in which antibodies to Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus attack and damage the basal ganglia. These are termed
paediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections (PANDAS). Children with this type of OCD may
respond rapidly to immunomodulatory agents such as intravenous immunoglobulin and plasma exchange. Fifth, structural neuroimaging
studies show anatomical abnormalities in the basal ganglia, thalamus and prefrontal cortex of individuals with OCD. Sixth, functional
neuroimaging studies show hyperactivation of the prefrontal cortex (particularly orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate regions) at rest, and
under symptom provocation in people with OCD and alleviation of this following successful treatment.
The neurotransmission hypothesis proposes that the symptoms of OCD are subserved by dysregulation of serotonergic and other
neurotransmission systems. There is strong evidence for a dysregulation of the serotonin system and some evidence for the dysregulation of


dopamine and glutamate neurotransmission systems in OCD (El Mansari & Blier, 2006). Clients' OCD have been shown to respond to specific
SSRIs such as clomipramine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline (Dougherty et al., 2007; Stewart et al., 2009). International
guidelines recommend SSRIs for the treatment of OCD (APA, 2007; NICE, 2005).
In a review of trials of combined and sequential treatment of OCD with CBT and medication, Albert and Brunatto (2009) concluded that
the combination of CBT and SSRIs has not been found to be clearly superior to either therapy alone except for patients with severe depression
who might benefit more from the combination than from CBT only. Offering CBT after medication is useful in promoting remission in
patients who respond to drugs and in promoting recovery in patients who failed to respond to medication.
Summary
OCD is characterized by obsessions and/or compulsions which cause clinically significant distress or impairment. Obsessions are unwanted
and intrusive thoughts. Compulsions are repetitive behaviours or mental acts that a person feels driven to perform in response to an
obsession. The lifetime prevalence of OCD is 2-3% with no gender differences with a mean age of onset at 19.5 years. Mood and anxiety
disorders are the most frequent comorbid difficulties. Psychological and neurobiological models of OCD inform CBT and SSRIs, which are the
two most effective available treatments. OCD is amenable to CBT if the therapist does the heavy lifting up front of (1) working out a solid case
formulation that transcends a description of the problem by identifying the key mechanisms by which the symptoms persist; and (2) sets
the stage for intervention. Therapists should take caution when identifying targets for intervention, ensuring that it is the appraisal of and
emotional response to the obsessional idea that is the focus, not the stimuli that trigger it. The combination of CBT and SSRIs is only more
effective than either therapy alone in patients with severe depression. CBT may be usefully offered to those patients who prefer medications,
if they do not respond to medication.


Exercise
Saskia was a devout Catholic who was plagued by doubts as to whether or not she was "right" with God. She spent much of her day analyzing
her previous actions to determine whether or not she had done anything sinful and prayed excessively in order to atone for any sin she might
have committed. These obsessional preoccupations were pervasive and debilitating.
What questions would you want to ask in order to build a working case formulation for Saskia? What are the potential culprits? What
would be your target in ERP? What wouldn't you target and why? What kinds of behavioural experiments could you see devising?
Further reading for practitioners
Abramowitz, J. S. (2006): Understanding and Treating Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Cognitive Behavioural Approach. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Abramowitz, J. S., McKay, D., & Taylor, S. (2008). Clinical Handbook of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and Related Problems. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Antony, M. M., Purdon, C., & Summerfeldt, L. J. (2007). Psychological Treatment of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: Fundamentals and
Beyond. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Clark, D. A. (2004). Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for OCD. New York: Guilford Press.
Egan, S., Wade, T. D., Shafran, R., & Antony, M. M. (2014). Cognitive-Behavioural Treatment of Perfectionism. New York: Guilford.
Rachman, S. (2003). The Treatment of Obsessions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rachman, S. (2006). Fear of Contamination: Assessment and Treatment. New York: Oxford University Press.


Steketee, G., & Frost, R. O. (2007). Compulsive Hoarding and Acquiring (Therapist Guide). New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilhelm, S., & Steketee, G. S. (2006). Cognitive Therapy for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Guide for Professionals. Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger Publications.
Evidence summaries
Abramowitz, J., Braddock, A., & Moore, E. (2009). Psychological treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein
(Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders (pp. 391-404). New York: Oxford University Press.
Dougherty, D., Rauch, S., & Jenike, M. (2007). Pharmacological treatments for obsessive compulsive disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman
(Eds.), A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 447-474). New York: Oxford University Press.
Franklin, M., & Foa, E. (2007). Cognitive behavioural treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide
to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 431-446). New York: Oxford University Press.
Stewart, E., Jenike, E., & Jenike, M. (2009). Biological treatment for obsessive compulsive disorder. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.),
Oxford Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders (pp. 375-390). New York: Oxford University Press.
Williams, M., Powers, M., & Foa, E. (2012). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based
Practice in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 313-336). Chichester: Wiley.
Assessment instruments
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.


Fineberg, N. A., Krishnaiah, R. B., Moberg, J., & O'Doherty, C. (2008). Clinical screening for obsessive- compulsive and related disorders.
Israel Journal of Psychiatry and Related Sciences, 45(3), 151-163.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Foa, E. B., Kozak, M. J., Salkovskis, P. M., Coles, M. E., & Amir, N. (1998). The validation of a new obsessive-compulsive disorder scale: the
Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 10, 206-214.
Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen. S. A., Mazure, D., D., Delgado, L. Heninger, G. R., & Charney, D. S. (1989). The Yale-Brown
Obsessive-Compulsive Scale: Part II, Validity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1012-1016.
Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen. S. A., Mazure, D., Fleischmann, R. L., Hill, C. L., Heninger, G. R., & Charney, D. S. (1989). The Yale-
Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale: Part I, Development, use and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1006-1011.
Sheehan. D. V. (2014). The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview, Version 7.0 for DSM-5 (M.I.N.I 7.0). Jacksonville FL: Medical
Outcomes Systems.
Steketee, G. S., et al. (2003). Psychometric validation of the Obsessive Beliefs Questionnaire and the Interpretation of Intrusions
Inventory. Part I. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 863-878.
Steketee, G. S., et al. (2005). Psychometric validation of the Obsessive Beliefs Questionnaire and the Interpretation of Intrusions
Inventory - part 2: Factor analysis and testing of a brief version. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1527-1542.
Resources for people with OCD
Abramowitz, J. S. (2009). Getting over OCD: A 10-step workbook for taking back your life. New York: Guilford Press.
Baer, L. (2000). Getting control: Overcoming your obsessions and compulsions, Revised Edition. New York: Plume.


Carmin, C. (2009). Obsessive-compulsive disorder demystified: An essential guide for understanding and living with OCD. Cambridge, MA:
Lifelong Books.
Foa, E. B., & Wilson, R. (2001). Stop obsessing! How to overcome your obsessions and compulsions, revised edition. New York: Bantam Books.
Grayson, J. (2004). Freedom from obsessive-compulsive disorder: A personalized recovery program for living with uncertainty. New York:
Berkley Publishing Group.
Hyman, B. M., & Pedrick, C. (2010). The OCD workbook: Your guide to breaking free from obsessive-compulsive disorder (3rd ed.). Oakland,
CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Munford, P. R. (2004). Overcoming compulsive checking: Free your mind from OCD. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Munford, P. R. (2005). Overcoming compulsive washing: Free your mind from OCD. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Purdon, C., & Clark, D. A. (2005). Overcoming obsessive thoughts: How to gain control of your OCD. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger
Publications.
References
Abramowitz, J., Braddock, A., & Moore, E. (2009). Psychological treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 391-404). New York: Oxford University Press.
Adam, Y., Meinlschmidt, G., Gloster, A. T., & Lieb, R. (2012). Obsessive-compulsive disorder in the community: 12-month prevalence,
comorbidity and impairment. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 47, 339-349.
Albert, U., & Brunatto, C. (2009). Obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults: Efficacy of combined and sequential treatments. Clinical
Neuropsychiatry: Journal of Treatment Evaluation, 6(2), 83-93.


American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-
IV-TR). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2007). American Psychiatric Association Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Amir, N., Freshman, M., & Foa, E. B. (2000). Family distress and involvement in relatives of obsessive-compulsive disorder patients.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 14, 209-217.
Antony, M. M., & Swinson, R. P. (2000). Phobic disorders and panic in adults: a guide to assessment and treatment. Washington DC:
American Psychological Association.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Bhar, S. S., & Kyrios, M. (2007). An investigation of self-ambivalence in obsessive compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
45, 1845-1857.
Boschen, M., & Vuksanovic, D. (2007). Deteriorating memory confidence, responsibility perceptions and repeated checking:
Comparisons in OCD and control samples. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 2098-2109.
Brandes, M., Soares, C. N., & Cohen, L. S. (2004). Postpartum onset obsessive compulsive disorder: diagnosis and management. Archives
of Women's Mental Health, 7(2), 99-110.
Cohen, L. J., Stein, D. J., Simeon, D., Spadaccini, E., Rosen, J., Aronowitz, B., & Hollander, E. (1995). Clinical profile, comorbidity, and
treatment history in 123 hair pullers: A survey study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 56(7), 319-326.
Coles, M. E., Radomsky, A. S., & Horng, B. (2006). Exploring the boundaries of memory distrust from repeated checking: Increasing
external validity and examining thresholds. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 995-1006.


Dougherty, D., Rauch, S., & Jenike, M. (2007). Pharmacological treatments for obsessive compulsive disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman
(Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (Third Edition, pp. 447-474). New York: Oxford University Press.
Egan, S., Wade, T. D., Shafran, R., & Antony, M. M. (2014). Cognitive-Behavioural Treatment of Perfectionism. New York: Guilford.
Eisen, J. L., Mancebo, M. A., Pinto, A., Coles, M. E., Pagano, M. E., Stout, R., & Rasmussen, S. A. (2006). Impact of obsessive-compulsive
disorder on quality of life. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 47(4), 270-275.
El Mansari, M., & Blier, P. (2006). Mechanisms of action of current and potential pharmacotherapies of obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 30(3), 362-373.
Ferrao, Y. A., Shavitt, R. G., Prado, H., Fontenelle, L. F., Malavazzi, D. M., de Mathis, M. A., ... do Rosario, M. C. (2012). Sensory phenomena
associated with repetitive behaviours in obsessive-compulsive disorder: an exploratory study of 1001 patients. Psychiatry Research,
197(3), 253-258.
Fineberg, N. A., Krishnaiah, R. B., Moberg, J., & O'Doherty, C. (2008). Clinical screening for obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.
Israel Journal of Psychiatry and Related Sciences, 45(3), 151-163.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological Bulletin, 99(1), 20-35.
Foa, E. B., & Tillmans, A. (1980). The treatment of obsessive-compulsive neurosis. In A. Goldstein & E. B. Foa (Eds.), Handbook of
behavioural interventions: A clinical guide (pp. 416-499). New York: Wiley.
Fontenelle, L. F., & Hasler, G. (2008). The analytical epidemiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder: risk factors and correlates. Progress
in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 32(1), 1–15.
Fowle, H. J., & Boschen, M. J. (2011). The impact of compulsive cleaning on confidence in memory and cleanliness. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 25, 237-243.


Franklin, M., & Foa, E. (2007). Cognitive behavioural treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A guide
to treatments that work (Third Edition, pp. 431-446). New York: Oxford University Press.
Frederici, A., Summerfeldt, L. J., Harrington, J. L., McCabe, R., Purdon, C., Rowa, K., & Antony, M. M. (2010). Consistency between self-
report and clinician-administered versions of the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24, 729-733.
Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Delgado, P., Heninger, G. R., & Charney, D. S. (1989a). The Yale-Brown Obsessive
Compulsive Scale. II. Validity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1012-1016.
Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Fleischmann, R. L., Hill, C. L., Charney, D. S. (1989b). The Yale-Brown
Obsessive Compulsive Scale. I. Development, use and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1006-1011.
Grabe, H. J., Meyer, C., Hapke, U., Rumpf, H. J., Freyberger, H. J., Dilling, H., & John, U. (2001). Lifetime-comorbidity of obsessive-
compulsive disorder and subclinical obsessive-compulsive disorder in Northern Germany. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 251(3), 130-135.
Grabill, K., Merlo, L., Duke, D., Harford, K-L., Keeley, M. L., Geffken, G. R., & Storch, E. A. (2008). Assessment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder: A review. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 22, 1-17.
Hermans, D., Marten, K., De Cort, K., Pieters, G., & Eelen, P. (2003). Reality monitoring and metacognitive beliefs related to cognitive
confidence in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 383-401.
Lapidus, K., Stern, E., Berlin, H., & Goodman, W. (2014). Functional neuroimaging and models for obsessive-compulsive disorder and
obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders. In E. Storch & D. McKay (Eds.), Obsessive-compulsive disorder and its spectrum: A life-span
approach. (pp. 363-396). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Leckman, J. F., Denys, D., Simpson, H. B., Mataix-Coles, D., Hollander, E., Saxena, S., et al. (2010). Obsessive-compulsive disorder: A review
of the diagnostic criteria and possible subtypes and dimensional specifiers for DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 507-527.


Leonard, R. C., & Riemann, B. C. (2012). The co-occurrence of obsessions and compulsions in OCD. The Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive
and Related Disorders, 1, 211-215.
Maia, T. V., Cooney, R. E., & Peterson, B. S. (2008). The neural bases of obsessive-compulsive disorder in children and adults. Development
and Psychopathology, 20(4), 1251-1283.
Maltby, N., & Tolin, D. F. (2003). Overview of treatments for OCD and spectrum conditions: Conceptualization, theory and practice. Brief
Treatment and Crisis Intervention, 3, 127-144.
Milosevic, I., & Radomsky, R. (2013a). Keep your eye on the target: Safety behaviour reduces targeted threat beliefs following a
behavioural experiment. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 37, 557-571.
Milosevic, I., & Radomsky, R. (2013b). Incorporating judicious use of safety behaviours into exposure-based treatments for anxiety
disorders: A study of treatment acceptability. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 27, 155-174.
Moritz, S. (2008). A review of quality of life and depression in obsessive-compulsive disorder. CNS Spectrums, 13(S14), 16-22.
Moritz, S., Claussen, M., Hauschildt, M., & Kellner, M. (2014). Perceptual properties of obsessive thoughts are associated with low insight
in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 202, 562-565.
Nedeljkovic, M., & Kyrios, M. (2007). Confidence in memory and other cognitive processes in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 45, 2899-2914.
Nedeljkovic, M., Moulding, R., Kyrios, M., & Doron, G. (2009). The relationship of cognitive confidence to OCD symptoms. Journal of
Anxiety Disorders, 23, 463-468.
NICE. (2005). Obsessive Compulsive Disorder: Core Interventions in the Treatment of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and Body Dysmorphic
Disorder (Clinical Guideline 31). London: Author.
Padesky, C. A., & Greenberger, D. (1995). Clinician's Guide to Mind over Mood. New York: Guilford.
Phillips, K. A. (2000). Quality of life for patients with body dysmorphic disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 188(3), 170-175.


Purdon, C. (2009). Psychological approaches to understanding obsessive-compulsive disorder. In M. Stein & M. M. Antony (Eds.),
Handbook of anxiety and the anxiety disorders (pp. 238-249). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Purdon, C. (2012). Assessing co-morbidity, family, and functioning in OCD. In G. Steketee (Ed.), Oxford handbook of obsessive compulsive
and spectrum disorders. (pp. 275-290). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Purdon, C., & Clark, D. A. (1993). Obsessional intrusive thoughts in nonclinical subjects. Part I. Content and relation with depressive,
anxious and obsessional symptoms. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 713-720.
Purdon, C., & Clark, D. A. (1999). Metacognition and obsessions. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 6, 96-101.
Purdon, C., & Clark, D. A. (2002). The need to control thoughts. In R. Frost & G. Steketee (Eds.), Cognitive approaches to obsessions and
compulsions: Theory, assessment and treatment (pp. 29-43). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier/Pergamon.
Purdon, C., Rowa, K., & Antony, M. M. (2005). Thought suppression and its effects on thought frequency, appraisal and mood state in
individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 93-108.
Rachman, S. (1976). The modification of obsessions: A new formulation. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 14, 437-443.
Rachman, S. (1997). A cognitive theory of obsessions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 35, 793-802.
Rachman, S. (1998). A cognitive theory of obsessions: Elaborations. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36, 385-401.
Rachman, S. (2002). A cognitive theory of compulsive checking. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40, 624-639.
Rachman, S. J., & de Silva, P. (1978). Abnormal and normal obsessions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 16, 233-248.
Rachman, S. J., & Hodgson, R. J. (1980). Obsessions and compulsions. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Radomsky, A. S., Dugas, M. J., Alcolado, G. M., & Lavoie, S. L. (2014). When more is less: Doubt, repetition, memory, metamemory, and
compulsive checking in OCD. Behaviour Research & Therapy, 59, 30-39.
Radomsky, A. S., Gilchrist, P. T., & Dussault, D. (2006). Repeated checking really does cause memory distrust. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 44, 305-316.


Renshaw, K. D., Steketee, G., & Chambless, D. L. (2005). Involving family members in the treatment of OCD. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
34, 164-175.
Rowa, K., Purdon, C., Summerfeldt, L., & Antony, M. M. (2005). Why are some obsessions more upsetting than others? Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 43, 1453-1465.
Ruscio, A. M., Stein, D. J., Chiu, W. T., & Kessler, R. C. (2010). The epidemiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Molecular Psychiatry, 15(1), 53-63.
Salkovskis, P. M. (1985). Obsessional-compulsive problems: A cognitive-behavioural analysis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23, 571-
584.
Salkovskis, P. M. (1989). Cognitive-behavioural factors and the persistence of intrusive thoughts in obsessional problems. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 27, 677-682.
Salkovskis, P. M. (1999). Understanding and treating obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, S29-S52.
Salkovskis, P. M., Richards, H. C., & Forrester, E. (1995). The relationship between obsessional problems and intrusive thoughts.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23, 281-299.
Sheehan, D. V. (2014). The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview, Version 7.0 for DSM-5 (M.I.N.I 7.0). Jacksonville, FL: Medical
Outcomes Systems.
Sookman, D., & Pinard, G. (2002). Overestimation of threat and intolerance of uncertainty in obsessive-compulsive disorder. In R. Frost
& G. Steketee (Eds.), Cognitive Approaches to Obsessions and Compulsions: Theory, Assessment and Treatment (pp. 63–89). Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Elsevier/Pergamon.
Steketee, G. (1999). Overcoming Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Behavioural and Cognitive Protocol for the Treatment of OCD. Oakland,
CA: New Harbinger.


Steketee, G. S., et al. (2003). Psychometric validation of the Obsessive Beliefs Questionnaire and the Interpretation of Intrusions
Inventory. Part I. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 863-878.
Steketee, G. S., et al. (2005). Psychometric validation of the Obsessive Beliefs Questionnaire and the Interpretation of Intrusions
Inventory-part 2: Factor analysis and testing of a brief version. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 1527-1542.
Steketee, G., Frost, R. O., & Cohen, I. (1998). Beliefs in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 12, 525-537.
Stewart, E., Jenike, E., & Jenike, M. (2009). Biological treatment for obsessive compulsive disorder. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.),
Oxford Handbook of Anxiety and Related Disorders (pp. 375-390). New York: Oxford University Press.
Storch, E., & McKay, D. (2014). Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Its Spectrum: A Life-Span Approach. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Taylor, S. (2011). Early versus late onset obsessive-compulsive disorder: Evidence for distinct subtypes. Clinical Psychology Review, 31,
1083-1100.
Taylor, S. (2014). Twin studies of the genetic and environmental aetiology of obsessive-compulsive and related phenomena. In E. Storch
& D. McKay (Eds.), Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Its Spectrum: A Life-Span Approach (pp. 347-362). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Taylor, S., Abramowitz, J. S., & McKay, D. (2009). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. The Lancet, 374, 491-499.
Thordarson, D. S., & Shafran, R. (2002). Importance of thoughts. In R. Frost & G. Steketee (Eds.), Cognitive approaches to obsessions and
compulsions: Theory, assessment and treatment (pp. 15-28). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier/Pergamon.
van den Hout, M., & Kindt, M. (2003). Repeated checking causes memory distrust. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 301-316.
van den Hout, M. A., Engelhard, I. M., de Boer, C., du Bois, A., & Dek, E. (2008). Perseverative and compulsive-like staring causes
uncertainty about perception. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46, 1300-1304.


Van Noppen, B., & Steketee, G. (2003). Family responses and multifamily behavioural treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Brief
Treatment and Crisis Intervention, 3, 231-247.
Vogel, P., Stiles, T. C., Götestam, K. G. (2004). Adding cognitive therapy elements to exposure therapy for obsessive compulsive disorder:
A controlled study. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 32, 275-290.
Williams, M. T., Farris, S. G., Turkheimer, E., Pinto, A., Ozanick, K., Franklin, M. E., et al. (2011). Myth of the pure obsessional type in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 28, 495-500.
Williams, M., Powers, M., & Foa, E. (2012). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based
practice in clinical psychology, adult disorders (pp. 313-336). Chichester: Wiley.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1993). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.


Chapter 17 Post-traumatic stress disorder
Mark Creamer and Jessica Carty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-17
Case example
Matt, a 28-year-old married male with two children, presented for treatment 12 months post-trauma. He had previously resisted treatment
but agreed to seek help after punching a wall during an argument with his wife.
History of presenting complaint
Following an argument in a bar, Matt was attacked by three men while walking alone in a nearby street. They punched and kicked him
repeatedly about his head and body. One of the men pulled a knife and threatened to kill him before leaving him lying in the street. Matt
feared for his life throughout the incident, stating that he believed he was going to die and that he would never see his wife or children again.
He was not intoxicated at the time of the attack, having only consumed a single drink. He reported symptoms of extreme fear and high
arousal (heart racing, sweating) during the incident. Sometime later a passing motorist saw him and called an ambulance.


Matt remained overnight in the hospital but did not sustain any permanent injuries from the attack. Upon his return home, he became
fearful of leaving the house and did not go outside for over a week. During this time, he was required to repeat the story for police statements.
Each retelling was accompanied by high physiological arousal and intense feelings of fear and anger. Since then, he refused to discuss the
incident or his reactions with anyone (including his wife). He is a builder and was off work for several weeks as a result of his injuries. After
returning to work, his performance was patchy. He was often late, took longer to complete tasks and felt that he was generally "not coping"
with work. He reported that his social life was virtually non-existent. He gave up many activities (including playing soccer and coaching a
basketball team) that were previously important to him. He noted that he was constantly irritable with others.

Mental state
Matt presented as a casually dressed man of average intelligence who initially appeared defensive and tense. His responses were brief and
contained little personal information. During the interview he became more relaxed and eventually spoke openly about his history and
current problems. His affect varied from flat to angry, raising his voice when talking about the effect the incident had had on his life. Matt
denied thoughts of harm towards himself or others. He showed little insight and was unable to understand why he had not recovered from
the event, seeing it as a sign of weakness. Equally, he was highly motivated to work on his problems saying that he would "do anything" to
get back to the way he was prior to the assault.
During the interview, Matt reported several symptoms typical of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). He was troubled by vivid intrusive
images, notably faces of the men and the knife, and occasional nightmares (although these had reduced in frequency). He was easily
distressed and angered by similar incidents reported in the media, and was upset by memories of his inability to defend himself during the
attack. He avoided talking about the incident, tried to block thoughts from his mind and had significantly changed his lifestyle in order to
avoid potential reminders. Previously very sociable, he had become withdrawn and avoided social activities, saying that they no longer held
any enjoyment for him. He complained of feeling tense and agitated, reporting that he would "explode" in response to minor frustrations.


His sleep had become very disturbed, dropping from 7-8 hours per night before the incident to 4-5 hours currently. He complained of
problems with memory and decision making, and stated that he was unable to concentrate sufficiently to read books or focus on television
programmes. He talked of being hypervigilant and "jumpy" when away from home, particularly when out at night (which he tried to avoid
if at all possible). His alcohol consumption had increased significantly to regular consumption of 5-6 standard drinks each evening. The
course of symptoms over the previous 12 months had been relatively stable, with a slight reduction in intrusive symptoms accompanied by
an increase in avoidance and general arousal.
A brief interview with Matt's partner confirmed this story. She emphasised his short temper, social withdrawal and emotional numbing.
In particular, she was worried about his anger.

History
There was no evidence of significant prior psychiatric or medical history. The oldest of three children, his childhood was relatively stable and
he always had several friends. He described his mother as a friendly, quiet women. His father drank fairly heavily and would often become
verbally aggressive, although not physically violent. He reported that his family did not discuss problems but just "got on with things." He
left school at 15 to pursue a building apprenticeship. He had worked successfully as a builder for 13 years, a position he had enjoyed prior to
the trauma. He and his wife married 5 years ago and had two children (aged 2 and 4).

Premorbid personality
Matt described himself as being a happy and sociable person prior to the trauma. He had always been confident in his own ability,
particularly in areas requiring physical strength and stamina. Not particularly psychologically minded, his habitual style of coping with
stress appeared to be one of avoidance and denial.


Formulation
Matt met criteria for a diagnosis of chronic PTSD, with evidence of a traumatic experience, several re-experiencing symptoms, widespread
avoidance and numbing and persistent hyperarousal. The anger and substance use were complicating features and both were probably
impeding the recovery process. Despite an absence of prior trauma history or psychiatric problems, there appeared to be a history of familial
substance misuse (his father) and a habitual pattern of coping with stress by avoidance and denial. Although these strategies worked well
in the past prior to the traumatic event, they prevented Matt from integrating this experience and moving on. The traumatic memories
remained unchanged and continued to invade consciousness causing frequent distress. His attempts to deal with the memories by increased
avoidance, denial and emotional numbing resulted in social and occupational problems. The continued support that Matt received from
his wife, and their shared concern about the impact of his anger on their relationship, was a central motivator for him to seek help and to
address these problems.
Course of treatment
Note that all sessions were audio-recorded and Matt was asked to listen to the recording at least once between sessions. Treatment comprised
one 50-minute session per week for 9 weeks, followed by three follow-up sessions at fortnightly and then monthly intervals.
Initial sessions were devoted to developing rapport, conducting an assessment, establishing the credibility of the therapist, discussing
what treatment would involve, and attempting to allay Matt's concerns about the process. Psychoeducation about PTSD, including the
rationale for treatment, was conducted and reinforced using prepared handouts. Several symptom management strategies were introduced
over the initial sessions, with a focus on regular aerobic exercise, breathing control techniques, some simple self-statements, and scheduling
pleasant activities. Matt was asked to keep a diary of his alcohol consumption, which in itself reduced his intake dramatically. By about
session 4, a good therapeutic relationship had been established and Matt was feeling much more in control of his symptoms. He was

working hard at treatment and felt ready to tackle the traumatic memories. A hierarchy of avoided situations and activities was developed
collaboratively for in vivo exposure homework over the coming weeks.
Sessions 5, 6 and 7 comprised predominantly imaginal exposure to the feared memories of the assault. The process was graded, with Matt
allowed to skip the worst aspects (and keep his eyes open, talk in the past tense, etc.) in earlier sessions but not in later sessions. Subjective
units of distress (SUDs) were taken throughout to monitor habituation. A separate recording of these exposure components was made and
Matt was instructed to listen to it daily. Although a very distressing process for him, Matt was able to acknowledge the anxiety reduction and
felt very proud at having "confronted the skeletons in the closet."
Distorted and/or unhelpful cognitions that emerged during the imaginal exposure were noted. Where possible, these were discussed (with
a view to reformulating them) during the same session, with instructions to think through the issue during the week. A more systematic
approach to cognitive restructuring was briefly introduced in session 7 to address the key cognition that had not resolved during the
imaginal exposure: that he was a weak failure for not defending himself more and fighting back. Sessions 8 and 9 were devoted primarily
to cognitive restructuring, helping Matt to identify and challenge key negative cognitions associated with the assault and its aftermath.
Eventually, these cognitions were replaced with more realistic, rational and adaptive alternatives. Throughout the second half of treatment,
Matt continued in vivo exposure, with each therapy session beginning with a review of his progress in that area.
Session 10 was devoted to relapse prevention: providing education about the likely future course of the disorder, helping Matt to identify
high-risk times and generating a clear plan to deal with any symptom recurrence. Sessions 11 and 12 were largely devoted to reviewing
progress in the intervening period, as well as to addressing minor issues that arose.
Matt responded extremely well to treatment. Objective symptom measures administered weekly illustrated a sizeable drop after week 1,
with a general trend towards continued improvement through to session 8. Gains on these measures were maintained through to the final
follow-up session. Subjective reports from Matt and his wife revealed improvements in mood, social and occupational functioning, and
family relationships, as well as significant reductions in anger and substance use.


Clinical features and diagnosis
The clinical picture of PTSD is characterised by four core symptom groups: intrusion, active avoidance, passive avoidance/emotional
numbing and hyperarousal. Modifications to the DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) diagnostic criteria for PTSD in DSM-5 (APA, 2013) have expanded
the passive avoidance/emotional numbing group into a more general, “negative alterations in cognitions and mood" symptom cluster. At the
time of writing, ICD-11 has not been published and, therefore, DSM-5 and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993) diagnostic criteria are given in Table 17.1.
In terms of a formal DSM-5 diagnosis, the first criterion to be met is experience of a traumatic event (Criterion A), with the current wording
emphasising physical threat to self or others during the experience.
Table 17.1 Diagnostic criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
DSM-5
ICD-10
A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or
sexual violence, in one or more of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s)
2. Witnessing, in person, the event occurring to others
3. Learning that a close relative or close friend was exposed
to violent or accidental trauma
A. Exposure to a stressful event or situation (either short or long
lasting) of exceptionally threatening or catastrophic nature,
which is likely to cause pervasive distress in almost anyone.
B. Persistent remembering or "reliving" the stressor by
intrusive flash backs, vivid memories, recurring dreams, or

4. Repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of
the traumatic event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting
human remains, professionals repeatedly exposed
to details of child abuse, but not exposure through
electronic media unless this is work related)
B. Presence of one or more of the following intrusion symptoms
associated with the traumatic event(s):
1. Recurrent, involuntary, intrusive distressing memories of
the traumatic event
2. Recurrent distressing dreams related to the event
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the
person feels or acts as if the event were recurring
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress after
exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or
resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s)
5. Marked physiological reactions to internal or external
cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the
traumatic event(s)
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic
event(s) as evidenced by one or both of the following:
by experiencing distress when exposed to circumstances
resembling or associated with the stressor.
C. Actual or preferred avoidance of circumstances resembling or
associated with the stressor (not present before exposure to
the stressor).
D. Either (1) or (2):
1. Inability to recall, either partially or completely, some
important aspects of the period of exposure to the
stressor
2. Persistent symptoms of increased psychological
sensitivity and arousal (not present before exposure to
the stressor) shown by any two of the following:
a. difficulty in falling or staying asleep;
b. irritability or outbursts of anger;
c. difficulty in concentrating;
d. hyper-vigilance;
e. exaggerated startle response.
E. Criteria B, C and D all occurred within six months of the
stressful event, or the end of a period of stress.

1. Avoidance of, or efforts to avoid distressing memories,
thoughts, or feelings associated with the trauma
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders
(people, places, conversations, activities, objects,
situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts or
feelings related to the trauma
D. Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with
the trauma as evidenced by two of the following:
1. Inability to recall an important aspect of the trauma
(typically due to dissociative amnesia and not due to
other factors such as head injury, alcohol or drugs)
2. Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or
expectations about oneself, others, or the world
3. Persistent, distorted cognitions about the cause or
consequences of the event leading to blame of self/others
4. Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror,
anger, guilt, shame)
5. Markedly diminished interest or participation in
significant activities
6. Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others

7. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions
E. Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with
the event as evidenced by two or more of the following:
1. Irritable behaviour or angry outbursts
2. Reckless or self destructive behaviour
3. Hypervigilance
4. Exaggerated startle response
5. Problems with concentration
6. Sleep disturbance
7. Duration of disturbance longer than 1 month
8. Causes clinically significant distress and impairment in
functioning.
9. Not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance or another medical condition.
Specify.
With dissociative symptoms, either depersonalization or derealization.
With delayed expression, if full criteria are not met until after 6 months.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993, pp. 99-100).

The B criteria represent the re-experiencing symptoms that characterise post-traumatic stress. The person remains haunted by the
traumatic memories. The five symptoms described in the DSM-5 include recurrent, intrusive, distressing memories, images and perceptions
(B1); nightmares (B2); "flashbacks" or a feeling that the event is happening again (B3); psychological distress on reminders (B4); and
physiological reactivity when reminded of the trauma (B5). At least one symptom from this cluster is required for a diagnosis. The intrusive
symptoms are extremely distressing.
The C criteria of active avoidance are conceptualised as attempts to prevent activation of the traumatic memories and the associated
distress by avoiding any reminders. They have something of a phobic quality: avoidance of internal stimuli such as memories, thoughts and
feelings associated with the trauma (C1); and avoidance of external stimuli such as activities, places or people that arouse recollections of
the trauma (C2). At least one of these two symptoms is required for a diagnosis. While the DSM-IV-TR included active and passive avoidance
within the same symptom cluster, DSM-5 responded to evidence that the two may represent separate constructs (Forbes et al., 2011) and
that the presence of numbing and dysphoria symptoms may distinguish PTSD from more common but less pathological trauma responses
(Breslau et al., 2005). The decision to separate active avoidance into its own cluster emphasises that this part of the clinical picture is crucial,
differentiating PTSD from other post-traumatic distress and, hopefully, improving diagnostic validity.
The new cluster D in DSM-5 describes negative cognitions and mood associated with the trauma, with some of these symptoms being
best conceptualised as a more passive form of avoidance. The D criteria symptoms include psychogenic amnesia for all or part of the event
(D1); exaggerated negative beliefs about oneself, others or the world (e.g. "I'm a bad person" or "other people can't be trusted"; D2); persistent
distorted cognitions about the cause or consequences, leading to blame of the self or others (e.g. "it was all my fault"; D3); persistent negative
emotional state, such as fear, anger or guilt (D4); loss of interest in normal activities (D5); detachment or estrangement from others (D6);
and inability to experience positive emotions (D7). The E criteria represent persistently increased arousal, with the following six symptoms
identified in the DSM-5 (of which two are required for a diagnosis): anger and irritability (D1); reckless or self-destructive behaviour
(D2); hypervigilance (D3); exaggerated startle response (D4); concentration problems (D5); and sleep disturbance (D6). DSM-5 requires the

presence of symptoms from criteria B, C, D and E for at least 1 month (Criterion F), and they must cause significant distress or functional
impairment (Criterion G). DSM-5 also allows for a dissociative subtype if prominent symptoms of derealisation or depersonalisation are
present, and a delayed PTSD subtype if the full diagnostic criteria are not met until at least 6 months post-trauma.
A related diagnosis, acute stress disorder (ASD), was introduced in DSM-IV (APA, 1994) and modified in DSM-5 to describe a post-trauma
reaction that has been present for more than 3 days but less than the 4 weeks required for a PTSD diagnosis. ASD criteria require the same
Criterion A as PTSD, with at least nine symptoms from a list of 14 intrusion, negative mood, dissociative, avoidance and arousal symptoms.
Although the ASD diagnosis in DSM-IV was designed to predict the subsequent development of PTSD and facilitate access to early treatment,
it has been criticised for confused criteria and a lack of empirical support (Bryant et al., 2012). It is too early to judge whether the DSM-5
revisions will improve the validity of the ASD diagnosis.
Research on "complex PTSD" or "complicated PTSD" began in the 1990s (Roth et al., 1997), looking at enduring maladaptive effects on
personality following sustained and severe trauma, such as experienced by people in concentration camps and by those who experience
long-term domestic violence and child sexual abuse. While the proposed new diagnostic category was not included in either DSM-IV or
DSM-5, ICD-10 includes a similar diagnostic category of "enduring personality change after catastrophic experience."
Comorbidity
Comorbidity is the norm rather than the exception in chronic PTSD, with 80%-85% of people meeting criteria for at least one other
psychiatric diagnosis (Creamer et al., 2001; Kessler et al., 1995). Depression, substance use disorders and other anxiety disorders
(notably panic and social phobia) are very common. Guilt is frequently reported by trauma survivors and somatic symptoms (including
gastrointestinal problems, aches and pains, cardiovascular symptoms, psychosexual difficulties and poor health behaviour) may also be
present. It is important to note that many of these other disorders frequently constitute the primary diagnosis following traumatic exposure


(Bryant et al., 2010) and clinicians should be careful not to diagnose all psychological responses to traumatic events as PTSD, especially when
an alternative diagnosis may be more appropriate.
Epidemiology and course
Recent epidemiological studies indicate that the experience of trauma is relatively common, with around 60% of the general population
having experienced a Criterion A1 event (Kessler et al., 1995; Mills et al., 2011). The subsequent prevalence of PTSD varies considerably
according to event type. Rape is consistently associated with the highest rates, while rates are generally lowest following natural disasters
and accidents.
Estimates of lifetime PTSD prevalence within the general community tend to cluster around 10% for women and 5% for men (Chapman
et al., 2012; Kessler et al., 1995). Lifetime prevalence rates, however, may be somewhat misleading; around half those people who develop
PTSD will recover over the first 12 months regardless of treatment (Kessler et al., 1995). Twelve-month prevalence rates vary across studies
and across cultures, but generally come in at around 4% - about half the lifetime rate (Chapman et al., 2012; Kessler et al., 1999). Data from
several sources (e.g. Kessler et al., 1995; Solomon & Mikulincer, 2006), however, suggest that individuals who still meet PTSD criteria at 6-
12 months post-trauma are likely (in the absence of effective treatment) to show a chronic course, with symptoms lasting for many decades.
Treatment outcome studies
Recent years have seen an increase in the number of high-quality randomised controlled trials (RCTs) investigating psychological and
pharmacological treatments for PTSD. Several excellent treatment guidelines, based on systematic reviews of the published evidence, are
now available (Forbes, Creamer, et al., 2010). Both the UK National Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE, 2005, available from http://
www.nice.org.uk) and the Australian National Health & Medical Research Council guidelines (Australian Centre for Posttraumatic Mental

Health, 2013, available from http://www.acpmh.unimelb.edu.au/resources/resources-guidelines.html) not only provide detailed literature
reviews, but also brief and accessible information for providers, consumers and purchasers of PTSD treatment services. Readers interested
in a systematic review of the treatment outcome research are strongly advised to study the relevant appendix of the latter (Australian)
document, which reviews all the relevant psychological and pharmacological treatment studies to 2013. While evidence-based treatment
guidelines focus only on interventions with a strong body of evidence to support them, broader reviews of a wider variety of treatment
approaches appear elsewhere (Foa et al., 2008). The interventions with the strongest evidence base are trauma-focused psychological
treatments (cognitive behavioural therapy, CBT, or eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing, EMDR). One of these approaches should
be used as the first-line intervention for PTSD unless there is a strong clinical justification for not doing so.
Cognitive behavioural approaches
The strongest evidence base in the treatment of PTSD exists for cognitive behavioural approaches, with particular reference to prolonged
exposure (PE) and cognitive therapy (CT, or an adaptation designed specifically for PTSD known as cognitive processing therapy, or CPT).
Although some kind of anxiety management (stress inoculation training, or SIT) is routinely used alongside PE or CPT in routine clinical
practice, this is a matter of clinical judgement. There is little evidence to suggest that it adds to treatment efficacy.
Several studies have sought to compare PE, CPT (or CT), and (in some studies) combined PE/CT in the treatment of PTSD (e.g. Bryant et
al., 2008; Resick et al., 2002). In all studies, these approaches have been shown to be superior to waitlist controls or supportive counselling,
although there is little to suggest reliable differences in outcome between these two therapeutic approaches. Importantly, recent evidence
suggests that treatment gains following PE and CPT are maintained through to 5-10 years post-treatment (Resick et al., 2012). In summary,
prolonged exposure and cognitive processing therapy have both been demonstrated as highly effective treatments for PTSD.


EMDR
Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR; Shapiro, 2001) is also recognised as an evidence-based first-line treatment for PTSD.
During treatment, the person is asked to focus on trauma-related imagery, thoughts, emotions and body sensations while simultaneously
moving their eyes back and forth following the movement of the therapist's fingers. It is speculated that this dual attention facilitates the
processing of the traumatic memory into existing knowledge networks, although the precise mechanism of action is not known. Over time,
EMDR has increasingly incorporated components that are consistent with more traditional CBT approaches including cognitive interweaving
(analogous to cognitive therapy), imaginal templating (rehearsal of coping responses to anticipated stressors as in SIT) and standard in
vivo exposure. Combined with its imaginal focus on traumatic images, EMDR now includes most of the core elements of standard trauma-
focused CBT. The protocol has shifted from a single session treatment to eight phases of treatment with the aforementioned elements
included, comparable in length to standard trauma-focused CBT. Several studies have demonstrated an efficacy for EMDR equivalent to that
of CBT (e.g. Rothbaum et al., 2005) or slightly worse than CBT (Taylor et al., 2003), but it remains a first-line treatment.
Other psychological approaches
Several other non-drug treatments have been proposed for the treatment of PTSD. Regrettably, few of these have an adequate theoretical
basis, and even fewer have been the subject of controlled clinical research. While brief psychodynamic approaches have a well-developed
theoretical basis, only one controlled study has appeared in the literature (Brom et al., 1989). That study reported improvements in PTSD
symptoms following brief psychodynamic therapy, although treatment effects were smaller than those obtained for desensitisation. A vast
array of other techniques have been proposed, many as "one-session" cures for PTSD. In the absence of either a strong theoretical basis
or objective empirical support, most of these do not justify attention in this review, and clinicians should exercise great caution when


considering such approaches. Nevertheless, it remains a possibility that some will prove to be useful interventions, and controlled clinical
trials are clearly required.

Group treatments
Group treatments have a long history in PTSD, albeit with a distinct lack of empirical support. Early approaches to PTSD group treatments
evolved from veteran "rap groups" and sought to provide a therapeutic, non-judgemental environment within which individuals who share
a similar traumatic history can validate each other's experiences while cultivating supportive interpersonal relationships. Several papers
have reported data from naturalistic studies of group treatments with veteran populations. While most have been discouraging, with little
treatment gain or even a deterioration (e.g. Johnson et al., 1996), later reports from CBT programmes with a strong outpatient focus have
provided cause for cautious optimism (Creamer et al., 1999).
Those studies do not constitute randomised controlled trials and, therefore, must be interpreted cautiously. The only RCT of group
treatment for PTSD in veterans to have appeared in the literature (Schnurr et al., 2003) randomly assigned 360 male Vietnam veterans
to receive either "trauma-focused" psychotherapy or a "present-centred" comparison treatment that avoided any focus on the traumatic
experiences. Both groups improved significantly from intake to post-treatment, with gains maintained at follow-up. While average
improvement was modest, around 40% of participants showed clinically significant change. Contrary to expectations, no overall differences
were found between treatment conditions. Importantly, however, analyses suggested that those who received an "adequate" dose of trauma-
focused treatment (attending at least 80% of sessions) did respond slightly better than those in the control condition. While the results are
modestly encouraging, the treatment gains were considerably less than those achieved using individual treatment in civilian populations.
While group interventions may have some benefits (e.g. providing support and a sense of belonging), there is little to recommend them at
this stage as a treatment of choice for PTSD.

Couple and family therapy
Despite the obvious impact of PTSD on the family of the sufferer, few controlled studies have investigated marital and family interventions.
A review by Riggs et al. (2007) identified two basic approaches, differentiated according to their therapeutic approach and treatment
outcome goals. Systemic treatments address disruption to family relationships caused by the trauma. This approach seeks to reduce
relationship distress and improve family functioning through conflict reduction and increased communication. Support treatments, on the
other hand, emphasise the role of partner and family support in trauma recovery and symptom reduction. These approaches emphasise
psychoeducation and skills training interventions. In the majority of cases (with the possible exception of treating traumatised children),
marital and family therapy in PTSD should be considered secondary to treatment targeted directly at the post-trauma symptoms.
Pharmacotherapy
Comprehensive reviews of pharmacological treatments for PTSD are available elsewhere (e.g. Stein et al., 2009) and only a brief summary
will be provided here. At present, PTSD-specific drugs have yet to be developed and the field has been restricted to medications developed
originally for other conditions such as anxiety and depression. This is somewhat surprising, since a range of neurobiological abnormalities
have been documented in PTSD, and good animal models exist that would provide excellent platforms for the development of novel
pharmacological agents for PTSD. It is also worth noting that rigorous meta-analyses tend to show little difference in outcomes between
medication and placebo (Australian Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health, 2013). This is not because there is no effect but, rather, because
large placebo effects are often observed. Finally, there is little research on treatment effectiveness in wider clinical practice and little data on
pharmacotherapy for treatment-resistant patients.
Nevertheless, the new generation antidepressants, notably the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), have emerged as the first-
line drug treatment for PTSD. Based on positive outcomes reported by the two largest RCTs available at that time (Brady et al., 2000;

Davidson, Rothbaum et al., 2001), the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) registered sertraline in 2001 as the first approved drug
treatment for PTSD, with paroxetine approved shortly after. At the time of writing, no other medications are approved for PTSD, and most
evidence-based guidelines continue to recommend SSRIs as the initial drug of choice. The atypical antipsychotic risperidone has been
the subject of four RCTs and, again, while effects were noted, differences from placebo were small. Drugs like risperidone, however, are
sometimes used in clinical practice as adjunctive pharmacotherapy - prescribed in addition to an SSRI when required – and may have some
benefit in cases of high arousal and agitation that does not settle with psychological treatment and/or an SSRI. A large number of other new
drugs - mostly types of antidepressant - have been the focus of single trials and certainly have potential, but it is premature to recommend
any of them in the absence of further controlled trials. Although benzodiazepines continue to be widely used (and may certainly have short-
term benefits for sedation), trials suggest that they are no better than placebo in reducing core PTSD symptoms and may even impede
recovery when used in the first few weeks following the trauma (Gelpin et al., 1996).
Expert consensus (given in treatment guidelines referred to earlier) suggests that chronic PTSD may require a higher dosage and longer
treatment phase than other disorders. Once a good treatment response has been achieved, medication should normally continue for 12-
24 months (or at least 24 months if the disorder is chronic with residual symptoms). At present, only one RCT has addressed cessation of
medication in PTSD (Davidson, Pearlstein et al., 2001). Not surprisingly, relapse rates were high.
In terms of prevention and early intervention, preliminary research suggests that anti-adrenergic agents such as clonidine and
propranolol may be useful in the very acute stages of traumatic stress (Friedman et al., 1993; Pitman et al., 2002), but there is little solid
evidence to support the role of pharmacotherapy at this early stage.
In summary, pharmacological interventions are likely to be useful for many patients with PTSD. Although empirical data are lacking,
pharmacotherapy should routinely be combined with psychological interventions in clinical practice in order to optimise treatment
response and to minimise relapse on cessation.

Preventing PTSD – interventions for all
It has now become common practice following trauma and disaster to provide population-based interventions to the whole exposed
population (i.e. without waiting for symptoms to emerge) with a view to preventing the development of more serious problems such as
PTSD. The best known of these was, for a long time, psychological debriefing (PD) or critical incident stress debriefing (CISD; Mitchell
& Everly, 1995). Systematic reviews of the research literature on psychological debriefing (e.g. Rose & Bisson, 1998), however, generally
conclude that the practice is at best inert and at worst dangerous (Mayou et al., 2000). It is worth noting that this research is very hard to
do, and well-designed RCTs may bear little resemblance to the way these interventions are carried out in routine practice, making the results
hard to interpret. It is also important to note that debriefing and related interventions are generally well received by participants, who tend
to see the process as very helpful. There is little doubt that the opportunity to chat informally with friends or colleagues after a shared
stressful experience has probably been a universal approach to dealing with frightening and upsetting events throughout human history.
The emphasis in the acute aftermath of trauma, therefore, should probably be to facilitate the use of naturally occurring support networks,
along with the provision of accurate information and screening for high-risk survivors (Bisson, 2003).
Despite the fact that research on other population-wide acute interventions is not much more encouraging (e.g. Agorastos et al., 2011), it
is still expected that health services will provide some kind of intervention and support to disaster survivors. Expert consensus now points
to Psychological First Aid (PFA) as an acute intervention for the whole exposed population that incorporates those components most likely
to be helpful while minimising potentially harmful ones. Although different models are available, the basic stages of PFA usually include: (1)
contact and engagement; (2) safety and attention to immediate needs; (3) stabilisation and arousal management; (4) gathering information
and establishing needs; (5) simple advice and coping strategies; (6) connecting with social support; and (7) connecting with other services if
required. PFA can be provided by trained laypersons, with mental health specialists providing backup and supervision as required.


Skills for Psychological Recovery (SPR) is a systematic approach for those presenting with low-level symptoms to primary care (Forbes,
Fletcher, et al., 2010). SPR is a manualised approach that provides primary health care providers with several modules to assist survivors
(e.g. problem solving, social connections, resuming pleasurable activities and managing distress). The interventions are presented in a step-
by-step fashion, with handouts and homework sheets. Excellent manuals for both PFA and SPR are available from the US Department of
Veterans Affairs (http://www.ptsd.va.gov).

Assessment
In most clinical settings, an unstructured interview comprises the primary assessment strategy. In PTSD, however, there may sometimes be
a need for objective assessment that will stand up to more rigorous scrutiny. Regardless of the process, the clinician must remain sensitive
to the mental state of the client and maintain a balance between providing empathetic and caring support to a distressed victim while
obtaining reliable and objective information. For a comprehensive overview of assessment issues in PTSD, see Wilson and Keane (2004).
The development of a successful treatment plan with realistic goals requires a comprehensive assessment of the patient's pre-trauma
history, the trauma itself, current psychosocial functioning, presence and course of PTSD symptoms, and possible comorbid conditions.
Attention should be directed towards key issues such as prior mental health problems (especially depression; see Ozer et al., 2003), prior
treatment experience and pre-trauma coping strategies. While it is inappropriate to assume the existence of prior trauma on the basis
of symptom profile, the clinician is advised to keep the possibility in mind; clients may be unwilling to disclose information regarding
prior trauma within the first session. Good social support is strongly associated with recovery (Brewin et al., 2000; Ozer et al., 2003)
and, therefore, the client's support network should be examined. If social support is lacking, clinicians may consider providing a skills-
development, problem-solving approach in the initial stages of treatment. An evaluation of the client's occupational functioning (in the
broadest sense) is important also; structure provided by daily routines often helps to restore a sense of control.


There is currently no agreed gold standard against which to make a PTSD diagnosis. Rather, clinicians should adopt a multifaceted
approach incorporating information from a variety of sources. In clinical settings, this may include unstructured psychiatric interviews (to
collect the aforementioned information), structured clinical interviews, self-report inventories and (where possible) informant reports. In
research contexts, the addition of psychophysiological measures (such as heart rate, EMG, GSR, skin temperature, etc.) may provide an extra
degree of objectivity, which is rarely practical in clinical settings.
Structured clinical interviews
Structured clinical interviews provide the optimal strategy for making a reliable clinical diagnosis and an indication of symptom severity.
For a competent, well-trained clinician, these measures combine a standardised and objective instrument with an element of clinical
judgement. The questions directly address PTSD symptoms and an objective scale determines whether each is sufficiently severe to meet
criteria.
The Clinician Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS; Weathers et al., 2001) is a psychometrically robust instrument designed to overcome
many of the limitations of other structured PTSD interviews. Each symptom is assessed for intensity and frequency and, where possible, is
behaviourally defined. While the CAPS is highly recommended in research settings, it is a little complex for use in routine clinical practice.
Several other well-validated structured PTSD interviews, which are briefer and simpler to administer, are appropriate in this context (see
Wilson & Keane, 2004, for a review). One useful measure for clinical use is the PTSD Symptom Scale Interview (PSS-I; Foa et al., 1993).
Self-report measures
The best self-report scales are psychometrically robust, relatively non-intrusive, and often (although not always) reasonably inexpensive.
While these measures have the potential to assess the client's own perception of his/her symptoms without influence from the interviewer,
they are easy to fake and thus pose a risk of symptom exaggeration or minimisation. Accordingly, it is not appropriate to rely on self-report

measures as the only (or even the primary) diagnostic tool. Rather, they provide a useful means of screening clients for more intensive
interview procedures, or to assess symptom change as a function of treatment through repeated administration.
While several established scales that have been around for decades continue to be popular among clinicians and researchers, the
diagnostic criteria have evolved in recent years and it is recommended that more contemporary scales be adopted where possible. The
revised PTSD Checklist (PCL; Weathers et al., 1993) covers the DSM PTSD symptoms, with each rated on a 5-point scale from "not at all" to
"extremely." The scale takes only 5 minutes to complete and possesses excellent psychometric qualities (McDonald & Calhoun, 2010). A score
of 50 is recommended as the diagnostic cut-off. The self-report version of PSS structured interview (PSS-SR; Falsetti et al., 1993) is similar to
the PCL, while the Davidson Trauma Scale (DTS; Zlotnick et al., 1996) allows for both frequency and intensity ratings. In the final analysis,
there is probably little to choose between these scales; any would be a useful addition for clinicians and researchers alike.
Symptom exaggeration and malingering
Perhaps more than any other disorder, symptom exaggeration and malingering is often an issue in PTSD. Although there has been debate
regarding the ease with which symptoms can be fabricated or exaggerated, and the extent to which this occurs (Frueh et al., 2000; Resnick,
1995), clinicians should remain aware of the possibility. Unless the person is a very good actor, credible descriptions of PTSD symptoms
are difficult to produce. Thus, clinicians should not be satisfied with a simple "yes/no" response, but should request further detail (e.g.
"tell me about the last time you experienced that what was it like?"). Other issues that may alert caution in the clinician include
endorsement of all 20 PTSD symptoms, a history of occupational and social instability, emphasis on re-experiencing (rather than avoidance
and numbing) symptoms and lack of sexual dysfunction or sleep disturbance. The clinician should remain alert for PTSD symptoms that
are directly observable during the interview (e.g. hypervigilance and flattened affect) and to contradictions in the patient's reports (e.g.
complete inability to work but retention of an active social life). Informant interviews, especially a spouse or partner, can further illuminate
the validity of a patient's report. In the final analysis, a thorough knowledge of the disorder and comprehensive assessment, incorporating


standardised instruments where possible, will minimise inaccuracies. However, unless we assume that everyone with PTSD is malingering
until proved otherwise, even the best clinicians may sometimes be deceived.
Treatment of PTSD
Cognitive behavioural treatment of PTSD
The major stages of CBT treatment for PTSD involve stabilisation and engagement, psychoeducation, anxiety management, prolonged
exposure, cognitive restructuring, and relapse prevention and maintenance. While interventions are generally presented in that order,
clinicians should remain flexible and integrate components where appropriate (e.g. exposure and cognitive restructuring). Treatment
sessions are usually recorded (e.g. on a mobile device or inexpensive digital recorder) to enable clients to review and consolidate the
information. Regular homework tasks are a central feature of treatment, a fact that should be made clear to clients from the outset of
treatment. The following provides an overview of each stage; interested readers are referred to specialist texts for more detail (e.g. Andrews
et al., 2003; Foa et al., 2007; Resick & Schnicke, 1993).
Stabilisation and engagement in treatment
Individuals with PTSD often present for treatment in crisis, particularly in the acute aftermath of trauma. Stabilisation of life crises, and
bringing substance use under control, is essential prior to the commencement of PTSD-specific interventions. Clients will not be able to
focus on trauma recovery until fundamental issues such as suicidal behaviour, major psychosocial crisis, and personal safety are recognised
and addressed.
Engaging patients in treatment may be particularly challenging, especially in chronic PTSD. Thus, it is essential that clinicians spend
adequate time in the early treatment phase developing rapport and a strong relationship with the client. Matt, for example, was reluctant to

accept treatment and initially unwilling to acknowledge problems. One advantage of the following treatment model is that the early stages,
such as psychoeducation and symptom management, are relatively non-threatening, allowing the clinician to demonstrate their knowledge,
credibility and non-judgemental approach. Thus, the therapeutic relationship is able to develop while still covering important ground.

Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation aims to help the client understand common trauma reactions and to provide a rationale for treatment. The sudden onset
of symptoms can be extremely frightening, especially for someone without a prior psychiatric history, and concern about symptoms is a
strong predictor of subsequent adjustment (Halligan et al., 2003). Secondary distress, possibly including denial, avoidance and withdrawal,
may arise as a consequence of such beliefs and impede recovery. Helping Matt to understand the nature and rationale for his symptoms was
a crucial factor in engaging him in the process of treatment.
Although the frequently used phrase "normal reactions in a normal person to an abnormal event" is generally inappropriate and may
sound dismissive of the client's distress, the concept is important and other phrases may be useful (e.g. "although the problems you have
told me about are very unpleasant, they are part of a common human response to life-threatening events and will decline"). The therapist
should talk through the symptoms and provide a rationale for their appearance (see, e.g. Foa et al., 2007). Written handouts are a useful
accompaniment, providing concrete validation that the survivor's personal experience and responses are not unique.

Symptom management
Most clients with PTSD present feeling frightened, vulnerable and out of control. Symptom management does not address the underlying
causes of PTSD but helps the client regain a sense of control. A range of strategies in physical, cognitive and behavioural domains may be
offered. It is important not to overwhelm the patient with too many strategies, but rather to select the most appropriate for each case.
In standard stress inoculation models, a rationale and description of the strategy is provided before it is modelled and practised during


the session. Any problems or misunderstandings should be discussed as they arise. The clinician should also emphasise the importance of
practising the skill (often several times a day) in non-stressful environments before attempting to use it to control anxiety in a difficult
(especially trauma-related) situation (Meichenbaum, 1985).
A first step often involves introducing the concept of subjective units of distress (SUDs). This "fear thermometer" is used by clients to rate
their current level of anxiety or distress on a scale of 0 ("perfectly relaxed and calm") to 100 ("the worst imaginable anxiety and distress").
SUDs allow the client to self-monitor the effects of anxiety-management interventions, providing a more objective measure of efficacy. As
SUDs are also a vital component of subsequent exposure treatment, introducing it at this stage allows the patient to practise rating his or her
own anxiety before being asked to do so during the difficult exposure phase.
Physiological arousal is a fundamental feature of traumatic stress. Physically oriented strategies are an ideal starting point while
the patient is still feeling vulnerable, as they not only produce rapid results, but are also non-threatening, easy to learn and have a
straightforward rationale (in terms of a fight-flight response). Moreover, clinical evidence suggests that effective arousal strategies improve
self-efficacy and expectations of recovery. A simple controlled breathing strategy is usually a good first step, and some clients will benefit
from progressive muscle relaxation (which is described in Table 3.5 in Chapter 3). Regular aerobic exercise, advice concerning diet (including
reduction in stimulants such as nicotine and caffeine) and getting enough rest can also do much to reduce arousal.
While cognitive interventions are routinely used in anxiety management to reduce arousal, they have a second possible role in PTSD
by providing some degree of control over intrusive memories and ruminations. The clinician must be careful not to send a contradictory
message here: thinking about the trauma is not unhealthy and, indeed, will be central to later treatment. However, it is important that the
client feels a sense of control over the thoughts so that they do not dominate every waking hour.
Distraction techniques can be used both to reduce arousal and to control intrusive memories. This approach can include anything from
counting backwards from 100 in sevens to asking patients to describe their current surroundings in intricate detail (the latter being

especially useful for patients who tend to dissociate). Clients should also be helped to engage in more natural forms of distraction such as
involvement in crafts, games and other creative activities (rather than passive strategies such as reading or watching TV).
Guided self-dialogue is routinely used in the early stages of treatment. The client is helped to generate, and to write out on a card to be
carried with them, coping statements for use in difficult situations including in vivo exposure tasks. Such statements (from Meichenbaum,
1985) are useful approaching the situation (e.g. "don't focus on how bad I feel: think about what I can do about it"), entering the situation
(e.g. "one step at a time; I can handle this"), coping with feelings of anxiety and distress as they arise (e.g. "I expect my fear to rise, but I
can keep it manageable") and positive reinforcement after the event (e.g. "I did it - I got through it; each time it will be easier"). Statements
relating specifically to the trauma are also useful (e.g. "I'm safe now").
Behaviourally oriented anxiety management techniques usually involve scheduling activities and structuring a daily routine.
Encouraging people to resume a normal routine as quickly as reasonably possible following a trauma is often beneficial (although they
should be discouraged from throwing themselves into work to avoid unpleasant memories). Pleasant activities should also be incorporated
into a daily plan (as in the treatment of depression), as the core symptoms of PTSD are likely to produce anhedonia and loss of interest. The
client should be encouraged to undertake activities with family and friends in order to reduce social withdrawal and to maintain healthy
relationships.
It is recommended that one or two interventions from each of the physical, cognitive and behavioural domains be provided to the patient
over the first few weeks. For Matt, regular aerobic exercise was a good starting point - non-threatening and effective on several levels. He
also responded well to controlled breathing, developed some helpful self-statements, and started to re-engage in enjoyable activities (both
alone and with his family). It is important that some progress is made in symptom management before commencing exposure, as the client's
ability to manage arousal and distress will become vital during the next stage of treatment.


Exposure
Providing an opportunity to confront the traumatic memories is the most empirically supported component of all successful PTSD
treatments. Excellent descriptions of exposure treatment in PTSD are provided elsewhere (e.g. Foa et al., 2007), and only a brief overview of
the technique follows.
Background Issues
In vivo exposure is generally considered to be more effective than imaginal exposure in treating the anxiety disorders. While it is neither
possible nor desirable to actually relive the trauma, a hierarchy of external cues (feared and avoided situations, activities, etc.) can be
generated with the client. This hierarchy should be progressively worked through as homework between sessions (with assistance from
a friend and/or the therapist from time to time if necessary). As the primary feared stimulus to be confronted is the traumatic memory,
however, the majority of exposure work will involve imaginal exposure.
Exposure targets should be graded according to the level of fear they provoke and each confronted in turn. With in vivo exposure this
is relatively straightforward – a list of feared situations is generated and rank-ordered, based on the number of SUDs associated with
them. Likewise, individuals who have suffered multiple traumas (e.g. emergency workers) may rate the severity of each event for imaginal
exposure and, again, each can be confronted in turn. Grading imaginal exposure within a single event is a little more difficult. While it is
generally best to move to the most powerful memories as quickly as reasonably possible, several strategies may be adopted to titrate the
exposure if necessary to ensure the client is not overwhelmed by emotion. If necessary, for example, clients may skip over the most difficult
aspects of the event in early sessions, but not later sessions; they may be allowed to keep their eyes open in early sessions, closing them
during later exposures to increase the vividness of the imagery; they may recount the event in past tense during early sessions (e.g. "I saw
him coming towards me") but move to the present tense in later sessions (e.g. "I can see him coming towards me"). The clinician can use

these strategies to grade exposure levels, maintaining arousal at levels that are sufficiently high to be optimally therapeutic, yet low enough
to manage.
The session should be prolonged until anxiety has reduced substantially - ideally by about 50%. Arousal levels routinely rise during
exposure before they start to drop and premature termination of exposure may incubate or worsen the anxiety response. In clinical practice,
it is not always possible to prolong the session long enough for the anxiety to reduce by half. At the very least, however, a significant
reduction must take place before the session is terminated, even if this means prolonging the session longer than usual.
Each item on the hierarchy needs to be repeated until it evokes minimal anxiety. This repetition may occur within a single session, within
multiple sessions, or between sessions. Finally exposure needs to be functional, which means that the affective components of the memory
must be accessed along with the stimulus material. Individuals with PTSD become adept at telling their story in a detached, unemotional
manner, accessing only part of the traumatic memory network. This process is not likely to be therapeutic. However, a few probing questions
are generally sufficient to access the accompanying affect, allowing habituation to occur.
The Process
The following provides a brief outline of the key stages required to conduct exposure in PTSD. First, the client is given a detailed rationale for
exposure based around habituation or emotional processing models (in lay terms) and often incorporating the use of metaphors to explain
the process (see Andrews et al., 2003; Foa et al., 2007). Second, the concept of SUDs is reviewed. Third, a hierarchy of feared external and
internal stimuli is constructed. It is often useful to generate two separate lists, one comprising potential targets for in vivo exposure and
the other (in the case of multiple trauma) a list of events for imaginal exposure. Each item on the hierarchy is rated using SUDs for the
predicted fear associated with confronting that situation, activity or memory. Fourth, the therapist works with the client to generate specific
homework assignments from the in vivo hierarchy for the client to practise every day over the coming days. Specificity is important: client
and therapist should agree on exactly what will be done, where, how often and so on. It is important to start with a relatively easy item,


ensuring success on the first trial. Each item is repeated until it evokes only minimal anxiety before the client continues down the list. Each
treatment session should commence with a review of the client's homework and the identification of subsequent targets.
In imaginal exposure, the client repeatedly describes the traumatic experience in detail, continuing until the event is over and a point
of safety reached. SUDs are taken at regular intervals (every few minutes). Although, as noted earlier, some grading may be possible, all
aspects of the traumatic memory must be confronted before treatment can be considered complete. As the SUDs gradually reduce over
repeated sessions, attention is increasingly directed towards the most distressing elements of the memory (or "hot spots"). These elements
may become the primary focus of later sessions during which it is important to maximise the cues in all sensory modalities (sights, smells,
etc.). Elements of cognitive restructuring are routinely incorporated towards the end of each session as new information emerges during the
exposure. Adequate time should be allocated at the end of the session to discuss the experience.
Repeated exposure to the traumatic memory is best achieved by recording the session and instructing the client to listen daily at home.
Obviously, this component may not be appropriate in all cases. At the very least, it is important to provide clear structure and guidelines for
homework and ensure that support is available should the experience prove too distressing. The therapist may also suggest that the client
write in detail about the incident. This process, outlined by Resick and Schnicke (1993), involves a handwritten, detailed account of the event
including as many sensory details as possible. The client should either rewrite the episode every day or read previous accounts at least once,
continuing the process until SUDs levels are relatively low throughout (e.g. a maximum of 30).
Finally, the client's understanding of their experience should be considered. A key to recovery may be the ability to answer fundamental
questions about what happened and why it happened (Figley, 1985). Many survivors have confused, fragmented memories of the trauma
making it difficult to process the experience and move on. Thus, therapists should look for opportunities to fill in these gaps and to assist the
client to make sense of the experience.

Potential Problems
If the aforementioned procedure is followed in the context of a good therapeutic relationship, few problems are likely to be encountered.
Nevertheless, exposure can be a powerful experience, involving high levels of emotion for both the therapist and client. It is vital that
clinicians communicate confidence in their ability to cope and help the client manage whatever emerges during the session. Ideally, anxiety
should be allowed to habituate of its own accord during exposure. However, arousal reduction techniques may be used if the client's distress
levels become intolerable or if insufficient habituation has occurred over a reasonable period (e.g. 60 minutes).
If problems arise, they are likely to be associated with either under or over-engagement with the memory. A failure to engage effectively
with the memory will be associated with poor outcome. Foa et al. (2007) suggest that asking clients to recount the most difficult aspects in
"slow motion” may help to maintain full engagement. Likewise, reassurances of safety by the therapist, and making the distinction between
experiencing the trauma itself and reliving the memory, may also be useful in encouraging full engagement. Equally, over-engagement may
also be counter-therapeutic. It is not possible to modify the traumatic memory network effectively and incorporate new information while
the client is dissociating (experiencing a "flashback"). The therapist should, therefore, make every effort to bring the client back to the "here
and now" before proceeding with exposure. Instructions to open their eyes, look around, feel the chair, describe the room, and so on are
all useful grounding strategies to use in such situations. It should be emphasised that this type of over-engagement is a rare occurrence if
exposure is conducted carefully according to the aforementioned guidelines.
Contraindications for exposure are basically common sense. Timing is important: does the client feel sufficiently in control (having
mastered some key symptom management strategies) and is rapport adequate? Acute life crises, current substance misuse, severe
psychiatric comorbidity and a history of treatment non-compliance should all suggest caution in the use of exposure. While the possibility
of iatrogenic effects with exposure – as with any other potent intervention - should not be ignored, the likelihood of adverse reactions can be
minimised by sensible clinical practice.

Cognitive restructuring
Cognitive restructuring techniques, based on the seminal work of Beck and his colleagues (Beck et al., 1979), have been used to directly
address dysfunctional thoughts and beliefs about the world, other people or themselves that have arisen from, or been strengthened by
the traumatic experience. Developed specifically for PTSD, cognitive processing therapy (CPT; Resick & Schnicke, 1993) involves cognitive
restructuring with reference to five primary themes: safety, trust, power, self-esteem and intimacy. Similarly, Foa et al. (2007) suggest
several core dysfunctional beliefs associated with PTSD, including pre-trauma beliefs about the self and the world, beliefs about reactions
or behaviour during the trauma, beliefs about the symptoms of PTSD, and beliefs about the reactions of others. For Matt, key unhelpful
cognitions revolved around safety for himself and his family, as well as self-perceptions of being weak and incompetent.
The therapist helps the client to identify these negative automatic thoughts and dysfunctional beliefs following the trauma. They are
subsequently treated as hypotheses rather than facts, which are challenged and replaced with more balanced and rational alternatives. This
is an active and rigorous process: it is not sufficient to simply replace the maladaptive cognitions with an adaptive alternative; the individual
must make an effort to really understand why the thought is based upon faulty logic. Many trauma survivors seek unrealistic assurances
(e.g. that they will never experience such an event again) and try to replace the distress-producing thoughts with beliefs that are blatantly
untrue. The therapist may need to help the client realistically evaluate the potential risks and to focus on learning to accept the uncertainty.
The timing of cognitive restructuring in PTSD is important. Although exposure work is often commenced prior to cognitive interventions,
in practice the two are intertwined. Exposure often helps to integrate the fragmented traumatic memory, revealing information that casts
a new perspective on the event. Cognitive restructuring can facilitate the processing of this perspective. Indeed, it may be postulated that
the processing of new information comprises the real therapeutic mechanism of both exposure and cognitive restructuring treatments.
Therapists should be prepared, therefore, to do at least some of the cognitive restructuring work in the same sessions as exposure when
target thoughts and beliefs are activated.


Guilt deserves special mention in this context. Clinicians are advised not to immediately dispute guilt-related cognitions, even if they appear highly irrational. Unlike fear or sadness, survivors may be less likely to discuss feelings of guilt with support networks (who would often respond instantly with reassurances). Thus, the client may benefit from the opportunity to simply ventilate the guilt in a reassuring and supportive environment. If guilt feelings do not resolve, however, cognitive restructuring may be indicated. The client is assisted in identifying the discrepancies between value judgements made on the basis of the context and available information during the trauma, and those made retrospectively within the current context of acceptable behaviour and with the benefit of hindsight. It is often useful to distinguish guilt about a specific behaviour or action (which may be quite healthy) from characterological guilt, which is potentially much more problematic (e.g. “I am a terrible, worthless person for behaving that way”). In such cases, the therapist needs to highlight the logical errors inherent in global self-rating, distinguishing between a bad or unwise behaviour and a bad person. This is particularly important when working with someone who did, undeniably, “do something bad” during the traumatic event. It is counter-therapeutic to pretend that it did not happen or that it was an acceptable way to behave. Rather, the clinician should assist the client to understand that it is illogical and unhelpful to generalise from a single mistake or negative act to rate their whole selves. Useful clinical advice on managing guilt in PTSD has been published elsewhere (e.g. Kubany & Watson, 2003).

Relapse prevention and maintenance

For acute PTSD presentations with little premorbid psychopathology or comorbidity, a return to normal functioning with a low chance of relapse may be possible. Even in such cases, however, and certainly in more chronic and complex cases, it is likely that some vulnerability will remain. Relapse may be triggered during periods of high stress, or exposure to (or hearing about) other traumatic events. Clients need to be prepared for, and have strategies to deal with, such situations. In more severe cases, ongoing support from a mental health professional or counselling agency may be required.

Relapse prevention normally involves several steps. First, the client should be informed that distress will occasionally occur when
confronted with reminders and that this is a normal part of traumatic stress reactions. Provided they are not too severe and do not last
too long, an ability to accept such lapses philosophically will indicate effective recovery. Second, it is important to identify situations that
may provoke a relapse, such as trauma reminders, hearing about or experiencing another trauma and times of high stress. The therapist
and client should develop a written plan to cope with lapses. Who can the client call (and what are their phone numbers)? What physical,
cognitive and behavioural coping strategies have they found useful and could use at such times? The written plan should include also
expectations of recovery, perhaps in the form of self-statements (e.g. "I expect to be upset when reminded of what happened, but that's OK.
It's a perfectly normal reaction and I can cope with it. It will pass. Now, what strategies can I use to take control and help myself feel better?").
It is important that the client tries to remain positive and is willing to seek professional help if necessary.
The duration and timing of treatment
A multitude of factors determine the duration of PTSD treatment. In the best-case scenario (e.g. treatment initiated within a few weeks of a
single incident trauma, good pre-trauma functioning, strong support networks), it should be possible to cover the aforementioned treatment
plan in 8-10 sessions. Most of the RCTs discussed earlier are based around this number of sessions, although sessions are often of 90 minutes'
duration. Indeed, it is advisable to schedule 90-minute sessions when conducting the exposure components of treatment in PTSD in order to
ensure sufficient time for the anxiety to habituate.
The more complex the presentation, the more time will be required for each component of treatment (especially the symptom
management and emotion regulation components), although the general format and structure of the intervention will remain largely the
same.


Managing comorbidity
Comorbidity, usually in the form of substance use disorders or depression, is the norm rather than the exception in chronic PTSD. The
appropriate management of comorbid conditions is an important factor in treatment. Unfortunately, there is a lack of solid empirical
evidence to guide clinicians and, as a result, therapeutic decisions regarding the management of comorbidity in the context of PTSD
treatment are generally based on informed clinical judgement. With regard to depression, clinical experience suggests that mild depression
is likely to resolve with improvement in PTSD and unlikely to interfere significantly with treatment. More severe depression, however, may
impact negatively on the treatment process and should be addressed prior to (or at least in conjunction with) a focus on PTSD. Evidence-
based psychological or pharmacological interventions may be useful and may have additional advantages in providing some amelioration of
core PTSD symptoms. The treatment of depression is described in Chapter 9.
There is a larger body of literature in the area of substance use and PTSD. Alcohol (or other substance) misuse is usually conceptualised
as a maladaptive attempt to manage trauma-related intrusion and arousal symptoms. As such, it is seen as being a component of the
numbing and avoidance symptoms and any attempts to remove this "crutch" should be accompanied (or preceded) by the provision of
alternative and more appropriate coping strategies. Clinicians disagree on the best treatment approach. Some argue that substance misuse
will decline with PTSD symptom improvement, indicating the need to treat core PTSD symptomatology first. Others believe that substance
misuse must be addressed first, partly because it may exacerbate (or even cause) some of the PTSD symptoms and partly because a period
of sobriety is required before traumatic memories can be adequately processed. At the very least, substance misuse must be under control
to the extent that the person can attend treatment without being intoxicated and can deal with the increase in emotional distress that
will be part of treatment without using drugs or alcohol as a means of coping. Contemporary opinion, however, is that the two should be
treated concurrently (Najavits, 2002; Ouimette & Brown, 2003) and the early stages of PTSD treatment should proceed in conjunction with
substance misuse interventions. There is significant overlap in areas of psychoeducation and symptom management skills, and change in

one area may facilitate change in the other. It is unlikely, however, that the intensive stages of exposure and cognitive restructuring will be
effective in the context of ongoing substance misuse. The treatment of substance misuse is covered in Chapter 24.
EMDR: rationale and clinical practice
The mechanisms underlying EMDR are unknown, and few attempts have been made to generate and test models to explain the processes by
which change may occur. Nevertheless, it has been proposed that when a person experiences a traumatic event with high states of anxiety
and terror, routine information processing in the brain may be blocked (Van der Kolk et al., 1996). The traumatic experience is then not
integrated into the ordinary explicit memory networks of semantic and autobiographical information, which are predominantly in the left
hemisphere. Instead, fragments of traumatic memory, such as tastes, sounds, images, physical sensations and smells are stored in a separate
traumatic memory network, predominantly in the right hemisphere, and not available for verbal processing. External cues that are similar
to some aspect of the trauma can trigger the entire traumatic memory network so that a person may feel the anxiety and terror of the trauma
again, or may re-experience bodily sensations associated with the trauma. For example, when Matt saw or had to handle kitchen knives
or was aware of groups of people standing close behind him, he became very anxious and felt threatened and angry. His muscles tensed,
particularly those in his arms, and his palms began to sweat.
In EMDR, a client is encouraged to pick and then focus on a part of the traumatic memory. This target, usually an image, becomes the
access point for the traumatic memory network. While focusing on the target, the clinician moves her fingers back and forth in front of the
client's eyes, asking the client to follow the eye movements with his eyes. Alternatively, the clinician may use hand-tapping or bilateral sound
stimulation. While the precise mechanism of action of EMDR is unclear, it is hypothesised that just as the eye movements that occur during
REM sleep facilitate the processing and integration of events of the day, in a similar way the eye movements and other bilateral stimulation
in EMDR accelerate information processing. It allows information from the traumatic memory to be integrated with the ordinary memory
network to yield new understanding and insight of the trauma that are less distressing. The client can watch the traumatic image but know

that it happened in the past and is not happening in the present. The traumatic image becomes increasing less vivid and upsetting, although
it is still remembered.
EMDR is conducted in a series of eight stages and a detailed description is provided by Shapiro (2001). First, a history is taken from the
client, traumatic memories and related maladaptive beliefs are identified, and the treatment plan for EMDR is discussed. In the second stage,
clients identify an image or memory that elicits feelings of safety that may be used if EMDR leads to excessive distress. In the third stage, the
client is asked to focus on a target memory and eye movement, or another stimulation is conducted. The client is asked about the target
picture or image and the associated negative cognition, or belief about the self that is associated with the picture, but is held in the present.
For example, Matt might describe being surrounded by the men who attacked him, with the image of the knife being held at his throat. His
negative cognition might be "I am vulnerable and unsafe." Following this, the therapist asks the client for a cognition that he would like to
believe about himself now when bringing up the image. This positive cognition is rated for how valid or true it feels now, on a scale of 1 (not
true) to 7 (true). For Matt, this might be "I am safe," with a rating of only 2. The client is next asked for the associated emotion and to rate this
in SUDs on a scale of 0 to 10. Matt felt tense and anxious, with a rating of 8. Lastly, the client is asked to locate any associated body sensations,
which for Matt might include sweating palms and tension in his arms. Stage 4 is the desensitisation phase, during which the clinician works
with the client on a target image using bilateral stimulation, looking for signs of a client's emotional shift. Some clients like to verbalise their
stream of thought or images while focusing on the target image, making it easier to identify a shift in emotion. Others who remain quiet will
indicate this shift non-verbally. After an obvious shift, or alternatively after about 25 saccades, or movements of eyes from left to right, or
equivalent aural or tapping stimulation, the clinician checks in with the client on how they are doing and what is coming up for them, as well
as checking SUDs. New images, sensations or emotions may then become the target for further desensitisation work. Desensitisation
continues until SUDs have decreased to 0 or 1. This is a sign to continue to the fifth stage, installing positive cognitions. The client is
encouraged to focus on the target image, think about the positive cognition and say how true or valid it feels now. Matt might re-rate the
validity of the positive cognition as 6. The image and positive cognition are held in mind during a further series of eye movements to "install

the cognitions." The sixth stage is a body scan, where the client is encouraged to notice any bodily sensations that come up when the target
image is focused on. Any positive sensations may then be amplified with further eye movements, while negative sensations need further
desensitisation, as they may be a sign of further unprocessed memories held in the body memory. The penultimate stage is closure, or
preparing the client to end the session, perhaps by noting all the good work done by the client in the session, using relaxation techniques or
meditation. The final stage is re-evaluation, which occurs at the start of the next session, when the clinician asks the client about images and
sensations that have come up since the last session.
Couple therapy and trauma
If PTSD has significantly impacted upon a client's marital or romantic relationship, or if a client is involved in a relationship that has led to
PTSD, couple therapy may represent an important component of a multimodal treatment programme, which also involves individual CBT.
Complex PTSD may have a significant impact on relationships in couples where one partner is a survivor of child sexual abuse (Compton
& Follette, 2002). Preliminary evidence points to the effectiveness of emotion-focused couple therapy, described in Chapter 5, as an adjunct
to individual CBT for such cases (Johnson & Makinen, 2003). With emotion-focused couple therapy, it is assumed that traumatised partners
have difficulty developing secure attachments to their partners and having their attachment needs met, because they lack internal working
models of others as "a secure base." Rather, they oscillate between viewing their partners as a source of safety and security to which
they cling on the one hand, and as a threatening source of anxiety, related to expectations of hurt and abandonment on the other. These
problematic internal working models of others lead traumatised people to develop destructive interaction patterns with their partners.
These interaction patterns prevent them from having their attachment needs met. Often these patterns are characterised by periods of
intense closeness, followed by periods of distancing after outbursts of extreme anger. These outbursts usually occur because, commonly
for child sexual abuse (CSA) survivors, even minor indications of loss of closeness are cues for traumatic memories of hurt, betrayal
and abandonment. In emotion-focused couple therapy, partners learn to recognise their problematic interaction patterns; the cues that

precipitate trauma-related intrusions and angry outbursts, and subsequent distancing. They also learn to distinguish between primary
emotions, such as the need for belonging and secondary emotions such as anger, which arise from frustration of such attachment needs.
Finally couples are helped to find more adaptive ways to express primary emotions and to practise using these approaches to meet each
other's attachment needs. This gradual process of finding ways to trust; to talk about and tolerate minor indications of loss of closeness; and
to tolerate experiencing traumatic intrusions without expressing extreme anger, is central to the use of emotion-focused couple therapy, to
help couples where one member is a survivor of CSA with complex PTSD. Substance misuse (discussed in Chapter 24), self-harm (discussed
in Chapters 11 and 27) and domestic violence are common comorbid problems in these couples, which may also require a couple-based
approach to treatment.
Summary
The clinical picture of PTSD is characterised by four core symptom groups: intrusion, active avoidance, passive avoidance/emotional
numbing and hyperarousal.
Comorbid depression, substance use disorders and other anxiety disorders are very common among people with PTSD. The lifetime
prevalence of PTSD is about 10% for women and 5% for men. Clinical interviews, self-report inventories, and informant reports should
be used to assess PTSD. CBT is the best validated treatment for PTSD, leading to rapid long-term remission in a majority of cases. The
major stages of CBT for PTSD involve stabilisation and engagement, psychoeducation, anxiety management, prolonged exposure, cognitive
restructuring, and relapse prevention and maintenance. There is some evidence that SSRIs may lead to symptomatic remission in
PTSD, although relapse is common when medication is discontinued. Pharmacotherapy should routinely be combined with psychological
interventions in clinical practice in order to optimise treatment response and to minimise relapse on cessation. PFA and SPR may be useful
in the prevention of PTSD.


Although the diagnosis of PTSD has been in the psychiatric nomenclature since 1980, there is much still to learn about the aetiology,
assessment and management of this complex condition. Equally, there has been an enormous increase in the quantity of research output
over the last two decades and considerable progress has been made. The last 10 years, in particular, have seen a growth in the number of well-
conducted treatment outcome studies, such that there is now a strong evidence base from which to recommend trauma-focused cognitive
behavioural interventions as the psychological treatment of choice for PTSD. It is hoped that the next decade will see further development
and refinement of effective treatments in order to better manage the mental health effects of trauma and to reduce the human and financial
costs associated with post-traumatic mental health problems.
Exercise
Divide into groups of three. Assign roles of psychologist, client and observer. Role-play the following scenarios, changing roles after each role-
play:
1. Part of an early session with Matt, where Matt is encouraged to describe his current symptoms and distress, and the psychologist
engages in psychoeducation with him.
2. Part of a session where the psychologist works with Matt to develop a hierarchy of external cues and feared situations for in vivo and
imaginal exposure.
3. Part of a session during which the psychologist asks Matt about the meaning of the event, and works to identify with him the negative
automatic thoughts and dysfunctional beliefs about the trauma.


Further reading for practitioners
Andrews, G., Creamer, M., Crino, R., Hunt, C., Lampe, L., & Page, A. (2003). The Treatment of Anxiety Disorders. Clinician's Guides and
Patient Manuals (Second Edition, Chapter 24-27). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., & Rothbaum, B. O. (2007). Prolonged Exposure Therapy for PTSD: Emotional Processing of Traumatic Experiences.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive Processing Therapy for Sexual Assault Victims: A Treatment Manual. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage Publications.
Shapiro, F. (2001). Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing. Basis Principles, Protocols and Procedures (Second Edition). New York:
Guilford.
Zayfert, C., & Becker, C. B. (2007). Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for PTSD: A Case Formulation Approach. New York: Guilford Press.
Evidence summaries
Australian Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health. (2013). Australian Guidelines for the Treatment of Adults with Acute Stress Disorder
and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Melbourne, VA: Phoenix Australia, Australian Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health. Retrieved from
http://phoenixaustralia.org/resources/ptsd-guidelines/
Creamer, M., & O'Donnell, M. (2002). Post-traumatic stress disorder. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 15(2), 163-168.
Foa, E. B., Keane, T. M., Friedman, M. J., & Cohen, J. (Eds.). (2008). Effective Treatments for PTSD: Practice Guidelines from the International
Society for Traumatic Stress Studies (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.


NICE. (2005). Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder: The Management of PTSD in Adults and Children in Primary and Secondary Care (Clinical
Guideline 26). London: Author. Retrieved from www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg26
Powers, M., Nayak, N., Cahill, S., & Foa, E. (2012). Post-traumatic stress and acute stress disorder In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.),
Handbook of Evidence-Based Practice in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 337-364). Chichester: Wiley.
Stein, D. J., Ipser, J., & McAnda, N. (2009). Pharmacotherapy of posttraumatic stress disorder: A review of meta-analyses and treatment
guidelines. CNS Spectr, 14(1 Suppl. 1), 25-31.
Assessment instruments
Briere, J. (1995). Trauma Symptom Inventory (TSI). Professional Manual. Odessa, FL: PAR.
Davidson, J., Malik, M., & Travers, J. (1997). Structured interview for PTSD (SIP): Psychometric validation for DSM-IV criteria. Depression
and Anxiety, 5, 127-129.
Falsetti, S. A., Resnick, H. S., Resick, P. A., & Kilpatrick, D. G. (1993). The modified PTSD Symptom Scale: A brief self-report measure of
posttraumatic stress disorder. The Behaviour Therapist, 16, 161-162.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Lauterbach, D., & Vrana, S. (1996). Three studies on the reliability and validity of a self-report measure of post traumatic stress disorder.
Assessment, 3, 17-25. [Contains the Purdue PTSD scale].
Lyons, J., & Keane, T. (1992). Keane PTSD Scale: MMPI and MMPI-2 update. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 5, 111-117.
McDonald, S. D., & Calhoun, P. S. (2010). The diagnostic accuracy of the PTSD checklist: A critical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(8),
976-987. [The PCL is available from www.ptsd.va.gov]


Weathers, F. W., Keane, T. M., & Davidson, J. (2001). Clinician-administered PTSD scale: A review of the first ten years of research.
Depression and Anxiety, 13(3), 132-156. [The CAPS is available from www.ptsd.va.gov]
Wilson, J. P., & Keane, T. M. (2004). Assessing Psychological Trauma and PTSD (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Websites
Phoenix Australia, Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health: http://phoenixaustralia.org/
US Department of Veteran Affairs, National Centre for PTSD: www.ptsd.va.gov
Training videos
Creamer, M., Forbes, D., Phelps, A., & Humphreys, L. (2004). Treating Traumatic Stress: Conducting Imaginal Exposure in PTSD-
Clinician's Manual and Training Video. Australian Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health. University of Melbourne. http://
www.acpmh.unimelb.edu.au
Shapiro, F. (2007). EMDR for Trauma. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. http://www.apa.org
Training videos available free from http://www.ptsd.va.gov
Further reading for clients
Herbert, C., & Wetmore, A. (2008). Overcoming Traumatic Stress: A Self-help Guide Using Cognitive Behavioural Techniques (Revised and
Updated). London: Constable & Robinson.


Rothbaum, B. O., Foa, E. G., & Hembree, E. A. (2007). Reclaiming Your Life from a Traumatic Experience: A Prolonged Exposure Treatment
Program Workbook. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schiraldi, G. (2009). The Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Sourcebook: A Guide to Healing, Recovery, and Growth (Second Edition). New York:
McGraw Hill.
Williams, M. B., & Poijula, S. (2013). The PTSD Workbook: Simple, Effective Techniques for Overcoming Traumatic Stress Symptoms (Second
Edition). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
References
Agorastos, A., Marmar, C. R., & Otte, C. (2011). Immediate and early behavioural interventions for the prevention of acute and
posttraumatic stress disorder. Current Opinions in Psychiatry, 24(6), 526-532.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV).
Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR).
Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Andrews, G., Creamer, M., Crino, R., Hunt, C., Lampe, L., & Page, A. (2003). The Treatment of Anxiety Disorders. Clinician's Guides and
Patient Manuals (Second Edition). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Australian Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health. (2013). Australian Guidelines for the Treatment of Adults with Acute Stress Disorder
and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Melbourne, VA: Phoenix Australia, Australian Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health. Available from
http://phoenixaustralia.org/resources/ptsd-guidelines/
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive Therapy of Depression. New York: Guilford Press.
Bisson, J. I. (2003). Single-session early psychological interventions following traumatic events. Clinical Psychology Review, 23(3), 481-
499.
Brady, K., Pearlstein, T., Asnis, G. M., Baker, D., Rothbaum, B., Sikes, C. R., et al. (2000). Efficacy and safety of sertraline treatment of
posttraumatic stress disorder: A randomised controlled trial. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 283(14), 1837-1844.
Breslau, N., Reboussin, B. A., Anthony, J. C., & Storr, C. L. (2005). The structure of posttraumatic stress disorder: Latent class analysis in 2
community samples. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(12), 1343-1351.
Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., & Valentine, J. D. (2000). Meta-analysis of risk factors for posttraumatic stress disorder in trauma-exposed
adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(5), 748-766.
Brom, D., Kleber, R. J., & Defares, P. B. (1989). Brief psychotherapy for posttraumatic stress disorders. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 57(5), 607-612.
Bryant, R. A., Creamer, M., O'Donnell, M., Silove, D., & McFarlane, A. C. (2012). The capacity of acute stress disorder to predict
posttraumatic psychiatric disorders. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 46, 168-173.
Bryant, R. A., Moulds, M. L., Guthrie, R. M., Dang, S. T., Mastrodomenico, J., Nixon, R.D.V., ... Creamer, M. (2008). A randomized controlled
trial of exposure therapy and cognitive restructuring for posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Clinical and Consulting Psychology, 76,
695-703.
Bryant, R. A., O'Donnell, M. L., Creamer, M., Silove, D., & McFarlane, A. C. (2010). The psychiatric sequelae of traumatic injury. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 312-320.


Chapman, C., Mills, K., Slade, T., McFarlane, A. C., Bryant, R., Creamer, M., ... Teesson, M. (2012). Remission from post-traumatic stress
disorder in the general population. Psychological Medicine, 48, 1695–1704
Compton, J., & Follette, V. (2002). Couple therapy when a partner has a history of child sexual abuse. In A. Gurman & N. Jacobson (Eds.),
Clinical Handbook of Couple Therapy (Third Edition, pp. 466-487). New York: Guilford.
Creamer, M., Burgess, P., & McFarlane, A. C. (2001). Post-traumatic stress disorder: findings from the Australian National Survey of
Mental Health and Well-being. Psychological Medicine, 31(7), 1237-1247.
Creamer, M., Morris, P., Biddle, D., & Elliott, P. (1999). Treatment outcome in Australian veterans with combat-related posttraumatic
stress disorder: A cause for cautious optimism? Journal of Traumatic Stress, 12(4), 545-558.
Davidson, J., Pearlstein, T., Londborg, P., Brady, K. T., Rothbaum, B., Bell, J., et al. (2001). Efficacy of sertraline in preventing relapse
of posttraumatic stress disorder: Results of a 28-week double-blind, placebo-controlled study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158(12),
1974-1981.
Davidson, J., Rothbaum, B. O., van der Kolk, B. A., Sikes, C. R., & Farfel, G. M. (2001). Multicenter, double-blind comparison of sertraline
and placebo in the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(5), 485-492.
Falsetti, S. A., Resnick, H. S., Resick, P. A., & Kilpatrick, D. G. (1993). The modified PTSD Symptom Scale: A brief self report measure of
posttraumatic stress disorder. The Behaviour Therapist, 16, 161-162.
Figley, C. R. (1985). Trauma and Its Wake. New York: Brunner/Mazel.
Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., & Rothbaum, B. O. (2007). Prolonged Exposure Therapy for PTSD: Emotional Processing of Traumatic Experiences.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Foa, E. B., Keane, T. M., Friedman, M. J., & Cohen, J. (Eds.). (2008). Effective Treatments for PTSD: Practice Guidelines from the International
Society for Traumatic Stress Studies (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.


Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Dancu, C. V., & Rothbaum, B. O. (1993). Reliability and validity of a brief instrument for assessing post-traumatic
stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 6(4), 459-473.
Forbes, D., Creamer, M., Bisson, J., Cohen, J., Crowe, B., Foa, E., ... Ursano, R. (2010). A guide to guidelines for the treatment of PTSD and
related conditions. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 23(5), 537-552.
Forbes, D., Fletcher, S., Lockwood, E., O'Donnell, M., Creamer, C., Bryant, R. A., ... Silove, D. (2011). Requiring both avoidance and
emotional numbing in DSM-V PTSD: Will it help? Journal of Affective Disorders, 130, 483-486.
Forbes, D., Fletcher, S., Wolfgang, B., Varker, T., Creamer, M., Brymer, M., ... Bryant, R. A. (2010). Practitioner perceptions of Skills for
Psychological Recovery: A training program for health practitioners in the aftermath of the Victorian bushfires. Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 44, 1105-1111.
Friedman, M. J., Charney, D. S., & Southwick, S. M. (1993). Pharmacotherapy for recently evacuated military casualties. Military Medicine,
158(7), 493-497.
Frueh, B. C., Hammer, M. B., Cahill, S. P., Gold, P. B., & Hamlin, K. (2000). Apparent symptom overreporting in combat veterans evaluated
for PTSD. Clinical Psychological Review, 20, 853-885.
Gelpin, E., Bonne, O., Peri, T., & Brandes, D. (1996). Treatment of recent trauma survivors with benzodiazepines: A prospective study.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 57(9), 390-394.
Halligan, S. L., Michael, T., Clark, D. M., & Ehlers, A. (2003). Posttraumatic stress disorder following assault: The role of cognitive
processing, trauma memory, and appraisals. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 71(3), 419–431.
Johnson, D. R., Rosenheck, R., Fontana, A., Lubin, H., Charney, D., & Southwick, S. (1996). Outcome of intensive inpatient treatment for
combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 771-777.
Johnson, S., & Makinen, J. (2003). Posttraumatic stress. In D. Snyder & M. Wishman (Eds.), Treating Difficult Couples: Helping Couples with
Co-existing Mental and Relationship Disorders (pp. 308-329). New York: Guilford.


Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset
distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the national comorbidity survey replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593-602.
Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Hughes, M., & Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress disorder in the national comorbidity survey. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 52, 1048-1060.
Kessler, R. C., Stang, P., Wittchen, H., Stein, M., & Walters, E. E. (1999). Lifetime comorbidities between social phobia and mood disorders
in the US national comorbidity survey. Psychological Medicine, 29(3), 555-567.
Kubany, E. S., & Watson, S. B. (2003). Guilt: Elaboration of a multidimensional model. Psychological Record, 53(1), 51-90.
Mayou, R. A., Ehlers, A., & Hobbs, M. (2000). Psychological debriefing for road traffic accident victims: Three-year follow-up of a
randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 589-593.
McDonald, S. D., & Calhoun, P. S. (2010). The diagnostic accuracy of the PTSD checklist: A critical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(8),
976-987.
Meichenbaum, D. (1985). Stress Inoculation Training. New York: Pergamon Press.
Mills, K. L., McFarlane, A. C., Slade, T., Creamer, M., Silove, D., Teesson, M., & Bryant, R. (2011). Assessing the prevalence of trauma
exposure in epidemiologic surveys. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 45, 407-415.
Mitchell, J. T., & Everly, G. S. (1995). The Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD) and the Prevention of Work-Related Traumatic Stress
Among High Risk Occupation Groups. New York: Plenum Press.
Najavits, L. M. (2002). Seeking Safety: A Treatment Manual for PTSD and Substance Abuse. New York: Guilford Press.
Najavits, L. M. (2003). Seeking safety: A treatment manual for PTSD and substance abuse. Psychotherapy Research, 13(1), 125-126.
NICE. (2005). Post-traumatic Stress Disorder: The Management of PTSD in Adults and Children in Primary and Secondary Care (Clinical
Guideline 26). London: Author.


Ouimette, P., & Brown, P. J. (2003). Trauma and Substance Abuse: Causes, Consequences, and Treatment of Comorbid Disorders. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Ozer, E. J., Best, S. R., Lipsey, T. L., & Weiss, D. S. (2003). Predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder and symptoms in adults: A meta-
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 129(1), 52-73.
Pitman, R. K., Sanders, K. M., Zusman, R. M., Healy, A. R., Cheema, F., Lasko, N. B., et al. (2002). Pilot study of secondary prevention of
posttraumatic stress disorder with propranolol. Biological Psychiatry, 51(2), 189–192.
Resick, P. A., Nishith, P., Weaver, T. L., Astin, M. C., & Feuer, C. A. (2002). A comparison of cognitive-processing therapy with prolonged
exposure and a waiting condition for the treatment of chronic posttraumatic stress disorder in female rape victims. Journal of Consulting
& Clinical Psychology, 70(4), 867-879.
Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive Processing Therapy for Sexual Assault Victims: A Treatment Manual. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage Publications.
Resick, P. A., Williams, L. F., Suvak, M. K., Monson, C. M., & Gradus, J. L. (2012). Long-term outcomes of cognitive-behavioural treatments
for posttraumatic stress disorder among female rape survivors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(2), 201-210.
Resnick, P. J. (1995). Guidelines for the evaluation of malingering in posttraumatic stress disorder. In R. I. Simon (Ed.), Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder in Litigation: Guidelines for Forensic Assessment (pp. 117-134). Washington DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Riggs, D. S., Monson, C. M., Glynn, S. M., & Canterino (2007). Couple and family therapy. In Foa, E. B., Keane, T. M., Friedman, M. J., & Cohen,
J. (Eds.), Effective Treatments for PTSD: Practice Guidelines rom the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies (Second Edition, pp.
458-478). New York: Guilford Publications.
Rose, S., & Bisson, J. (1998). Brief early psychological interventions following trauma: A systematic review of the literature. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 11(4), 697-710.


Roth, S., Newman, E., Pelcovitz, D., van der Kolk, B., & Mandel, F. S. (1997). Complex PTSD in victims exposed to sexual and physical abuse:
Results from the DSM-IV field trial for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 10, 539-555.
Rothbaum, B. O., Astin, M. C., & Marsteller, F. (2005). Prolonged exposure versus eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR)
for PTSD rape victims. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 18(6), 607-616.
Schnurr, P. P., Friedman, M. J., Foy, D. W., Shea, M. T., Hsieh, F. Y., Lavori, P. W., et al. (2003). Randomised trial of trauma-focused
group therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder-Results from a Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 60(5), 481-489.
Shapiro, F. (2001). Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing. Basis Principles, Protocols and Procedures (Second Edition). New York:
Guilford.
Solomon, Z., & Mikulincer, M. (2006). Trajectories of PTSD: A 20-year longitudinal study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(4), 659-
666.
Stein, D. J., Ipser, J., & McAnda, N. (2009). Pharmacotherapy of posttraumatic stress disorder: A review of meta-analyses and treatment
guidelines. CNS Spectr, 14(1 Suppl. 1), 25-31.
Taylor, S., Thordarson, D. S., Maxfield, L., Fedoroff, I. C., Lovell, K., & Ogrodniczuk, J. (2003). Comparative efficacy, speed, and adverse
effects of three PTSD treatments: Exposure therapy, EMDR, and relaxation training. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 71(2),
330-338.
Van der Kolk, B., McFarlane, A. C., & Weisaeth, L. (Eds.) (1996). Traumatic Stress. New York: Guilford.
Weathers, F. W., Keane, T. M., & Davidson, J. (2001). Clinician-administered PTSD scale: A review of the first ten years of research.
Depression and Anxiety, 13(3), 132-156.
Weathers, F. W., Litz, B. T., Herman, D. S., Huska, J. A., & Keane, T. M. (1993). The PTSD Checklist (PCL): Reliability, Validity, and Diagnostic
Utility. Paper presented at the 9th Annual Conference of the ISTSS, San Antonio.


Wilson, J. P., & Keane, T. M. (2004). Assessing Psychological Trauma and PTSD (Second Edition). New York: The Guilford Press.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1993). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Zlotnick, C., Davidson, J., Shea, M. T., & Pearlstein, T. (1996). Validation of the Davidson Trauma Scale in a sample of survivors of
childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184(4), 255-257.


Chapter 18 Depersonalization disorder
Alberto Blanco-Campal
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-18
Case example
Sean was a 24-year-old, single, second-year law student referred for psychological intervention by his GP who noted clinical features of panic
disorder and low mood. At interview he appeared anxious and when asked about his chief complaint he started by saying: "You might think
I am mad but ... it is hard to explain ... I feel as if I am not the real me." "It is like I am permanently looking at my own thoughts ... I know
it's me thinking but it feels as though I am not in control of them." "It feels as though the world around me has changed. It's as if I was in a
film or looking through a goldfish bowl, everything looks strange." It was evident that no metaphor was to Sean's full satisfaction. He offered
to share some notes that he had gathered ahead of his consultation and proceeded to read a list of expressions describing his experiences.
"It's weird but I often look at my parents and they look strange almost unreal, they don't feel like parents and the more I look at their faces
the more unfamiliar they get." "I often feel as if my arms don't belong to me and I have to move them to convince myself that it's me who is
moving them." "Sometimes my voice sounds weird not like mine, as though I have no control over it." Sean explained that his biggest fear

was that he was "going mad." He was terrified that the use of marijuana had permanently damaged his brain and that he was developing
Alzheimer's dementia causing him to forget about his own identity. This feeling was particularly acute in situations where he found himself
"as if suspended, as though my memories had no continuity, no past and no future, and I am afraid I may forget who I am." Sean reported
spending most of his day checking if he was still himself but it never felt right. He occasionally looked into the mirror to see if had changed
and he often tried to recall past personal events in order to reassure himself that he did not have Alzheimer's.
History of the problem
Sean's first episode of depersonalization (DP) occurred after smoking marijuana while away from home with friends. He remembered lying
in bed feeling dizzy and all of a sudden he felt like he was losing his sense of self and control over his body. He immediately thought that
he was going to lose consciousness or die. He described an "eerie" feeling and felt disconnected from his body as if he was "vanishing." He
panicked and ran to the bathroom to look in the mirror to check that he was still himself. He explained that he could not connect the image
in the mirror with his own sense of self. In a state of terror he rang his parents. His mother answered the phone, and he remembered feeling
frightened by the fact that he felt as if she was "distant, not herself." He felt disconnected from his mother and without any feelings towards
her, which increased his anxiety. His friends reassured him and brought him to the local hospital where a doctor told him that it was "just a
panic attack" and prescribed him Xanax. The following day he returned home.
These episodes of DP were initially short-lived (lasting from a few minutes to hours) but over time had become more prolonged and
recurrent (lasting from a day to a few weeks). They were exacerbated by physiological states of fatigue or sleep deprivation, post-alcohol
consumption, and situational factors including driving alone, socializing and fluorescent lighting. He was adamant that his symptoms were
identical to those he experienced while intoxicated with cannabis. After 4 months of persisting symptoms his parents sought a private
psychiatric evaluation. Sean was diagnosed with first episode schizophrenia and started on a course of neuroleptics. He reported little
benefit from this medication. In fact, he noted some exacerbation of his symptoms and after 2 weeks discontinued this medication without


medical advice. With time Sean developed a fear of venturing far from home and struggled to go to college. He avoided driving, unless he
was accompanied, since driving increased his DP. Formerly, gregarious and outgoing, with a great interest in sports, Sean was now finding
it hard to socialize with friends. He gave up drinking socially, explaining that although he felt some relief while drinking, the day after he
suffered a tenfold increase in his symptoms, often ending in casualty, with him feeling "panicky." Once a bright student and a high achiever,
Sean's college attendance had become very poor and he was forced to repeat two academic years complaining of difficulties concentrating
and learning new material. A year after the onset of symptoms, he attended a second psychiatrist who diagnosed him with panic disorder
with agoraphobia and started Sean on a course of fluoxetine (a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, or SSRI). Although his anxiety reduced
somewhat, his "strange feelings" were still present, though they were slightly more tolerable. Nevertheless, he admitted to being hopeless
about his future, thinking that he had no control over his situation. When seen for psychological assessment, 7 years after the onset of the
original symptoms, he was on a course of fluoxetine.
Sean was the younger of two siblings. His 32 year-old brother had been hospitalized for a month with a major depressive episode. Family
psychiatric history was otherwise unremarkable. Sean denied a personal history of psychiatric illness. Apart from sporadic drug use (i.e.
cannabis) he denied a history of alcohol or drug misuse. The preceding information was gathered from Sean over 3 assessment sessions
during which he completed two self-report measures: the Dissociative Experience Scale (DES) assessing dissociative symptoms in general
(Bernstein-Carlson & Putnam, 1986) and the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (CDS), a depersonalization-specific scale (Sierra & Berrios,
2000). On the DES-Total he scored 23, below the cut-off score of 30. However, he scored highly on the DES depersonalization/derealization
taxon (DES DP/DR = 41). His score on both the Trait and State version of the CDS were well within the clinical range (139 and 181,
respectively). In addition, two self-report measures of anxiety and depression were used. His scores on the Beck Depression Inventory-II of
29 (Beck & Steer, 1996) and the Beck Anxiety Inventory of 27 (Beck, 1990) were indicative of clinically significant symptoms of anxiety and
depression, fulfilling diagnostic criteria for panic disorder and depression.


In terms of his clinical diagnosis, while it was clear that Sean presented with other distressing concomitant mental conditions, that
is, panic disorder and depression, the spectrum of clinical symptoms of depersonalization that he experienced seemed "independent"
from these comorbid conditions, in that they did not only occur in their presence. Therefore his clinical presentation was in keeping
with the most chronic and severe form of pathological depersonalization, referred to as primary depersonalization disorder (DPD), which
is currently labelled by DSM-5 as depersonalization-derealization disorder (APA, 2013) or as depersonalization-derealization syndrome in
ICD-10 (WHO, 1993). Diagnostic criteria for these conditions are given in Table 18.1. Sean's symptoms of depersonalization were chronic,
severe and recurrent. His reality testing was intact and his symptoms caused him clinically significant distress and interfered with social
and vocational functioning. While his symptoms were chronic, he suffered them episodically, with episodes lasting from minutes to weeks.
From the clinical history it was clear that his predominant complaint was DP. Although his experiences of depersonalization coexisted with
panic disorder, they persisted after the resolution of episodes of panic attacks. Depersonalization predated the onset of his depression, which
appeared to represent a demoralized response to unremitting symptoms.
Table 18.1 Diagnostic criteria for depersonalization disorder
DSM-5Depersonalization/derealization disorder
ICD-10Depersonalization-derealization syndrome
A. The presence of persistent or recurrent experiences of A. Either 1 or 2
depersonalization, derealization, or both.
1. Depersonalization: Experiences of unreality,
detachment, or being an outside observer with
1. Depersonalization. The patient complains of a feeling of being
distant, "not really here" (for example he may complain that his
emotions, or feelings, or experience of his inner self are detached,

respect to one's thoughts, feelings, sensations,
body, or actions (e.g., perceptual alterations,
distorted sense of time, unreal or absent self,
emotional and/or physical numbing).
2. Derealization: Experiences of unreality or
detachment with respect to surroundings (e.g.,
individuals or objects are experienced as unreal,
dreamlike, foggy, lifeless, or visually distorted).
B. During the depersonalization or derealization
experiences, reality testing remains intact.
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the
physiological effects of substance (e.g., a drug of
abuse, medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
seizures).
E. The disturbance is not better explained by another
mental disorder, such as schizophrenia, panic
strange, not his own, or unpleasantly lost, or that his emotions or
movements feel as if they belong to someone else, or that he feels
as if acting in a play).
2. Derealization. The patient complains of a feeling of unreality
(for example he may complain that the surroundings or specific
objects look strange, distorted, flat, colourless, lifeless, dreary,
uninteresting, or like a stage upon which everyone is acting).
B. Retention of insight, in that the patient realizes that the change is
within himself, and is not imposed fromoutside by other persons or
forces. This diagnosis should not be used as a main or single diagnosis
when occurring in the presence of othermental disorders, such as
organic confusional or delusional states, or intoxication by alcohol or
drugs, schizophrenia and related disorders, mood disorders, anxiety
disorders, or other conditions (such as marked fatigue, hypoglycemia,
or immediately preceding or following epileptic seizures).

disorder, major depressive disorder, posttraumatic
stress disorder, or another dissociative disorder.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993, p. 110).
Formulation
Based on initial assessment, an individualized case formulation, given in Figure 18.1, was developed with Sean, guided by the general
cognitive-behavioural model outlined in Figure 18.2. In his case, depersonalization had an acute onset with cannabis intoxication being
the main precipitant. Sean experienced this as very frightening, interpreting his transient symptoms of drug-induced DP as impending
death or insanity. This subjective life-threatening situation set in motion a hardwired protective brain response characterized by emotional
numbing and reduced autonomic response resulting from an abnormally increased regulation by prefrontal regions. This shutdown of
emotional reactivity with associated loss of emotional tone in the experience of his self and his surroundings (including his family and
friends) generated the unpleasant and unfamiliar feelings that he described. This in turn generated an anxiety reaction, which served to
exacerbate his symptoms of DP, thus creating a vicious circle. A predisposing factor in his case might have been the family history of
depression, which may have led to premorbid concerns regarding his vulnerability to mental illness. Depersonalization was maintained by
a pattern of catastrophic attributions of his symptoms, interpreting them as a sign of madness or confirmation of permanent brain damage
signalling the beginning of Alzheimer's disease. Such beliefs set in place a "vicious semi-autonomous cycle" of anxiety followed by DP.
Thus, fear of impending episodes of DP led to an increase in self-focus on symptoms. This pattern resulted in a reduced threshold for the
perception of "unreality feelings" causing an increase in anxiety and consequent DP, which was set in motion by the same neurobiological


response. Unremitting DP had led to secondary panic disorder with non-pervasive agoraphobia and social withdrawal, causing Sean to feel
demoralized and depressed.
DISTANT PRECIPITANT
Cannabis Intoxication
Altered Mental State-Altered Sense of Self
(ie, Drug-induced Depersonalization)
Unpleasant/Frightening/Threatening Experience
(fear of loss of consciousness, impending death, fear of
insanity)
INCREASE IN ANXIETY SYMPTOMS
Paradoxical decrease in autonomic arousal
Involuntary Perpetuation
PROXIMAL PRECIPITANTS/
EXACERBATING FACTORS
Physiological States
Alcohol (post-consumption phase)
Fatigue and sleep deprivation
Situational factors
Social gatherings
SYMPTOMS OF DEPERSONALIZATION
UNDERLYING ASSUMPTION/
CORE BELIEF:
Premorbid concern regarding his
mental sanity resulting from his family
psychiatric history (i.e. older brother)
DEREALIZATION: Mom & Dad feel strange
DESOMATIZATION: 'As if my arms and
legs don't belong to me'
DEAFFECTUALIZATION: 'As if I had no feelings for
my Mom'
DEIDEATION: 'As if my memories of myself had no
continuity, no past, no future', 'difficulties concentrating'
CATASTROPHIC ATTRIBUTIONS OF DP & DR
MENTAL HEALTH ANXIETY
'I am going mad'
Fear of loss of identity: 1 am going to vanish & forget
about myself'
Fear of brain damage: 1 am developing brain damage'
INCREASE IN ANXIETY SYMPTOMS
Paradoxical decrease in autonomic arousal
MAINTENANCE CYCLE
Avoidance: Driving, being alone, social gatherings.
Safety Behaviors: Saying the right thing, keeping still, a
fixed expression, and minimal eye contact. Moving his arms
and legs to be reassured they belonged to him, looking into
the mirror to check if he had changed.
Cognitive Biases: Symptoms monitoring, obsessive
introspection (ie., constant checking feelings of unreality,
checking his memory).

Figure 18.1 Individualized case formulation using a cognitive-behavioural framework presented to Sean
Trauma/anxiety/panic/depression
stress/fatigue/substance intoxication
Symptoms of DP/DR
Situational attributions
for DP/DR
Tiredness
Effects of drug intoxication
Fear in a specific situation
Catastrophic attributions
for DP/DR
Fear of 'madness'
Fear of losing control
Fear of becoming invisible
Brain dysfunction attributions
Decrease in DP/DR
symptoms
As situational factors alleviate
Increase in anxiety symptoms
+ Paradoxical decrease in autonomic arousal
Maintenance cycle
• Avoidance: DP/DR-provoking
situations
• Safety behaviours: e.g. acting 'normal'
Cognitive biases: symptom
monitoring, reduced threshold for
perception of threat

Figure 18.2 Cognitive-behavioural model of depersonalization disorder
Note: Adapted from Hunter et al. (2003).
Treatment
On the basis of this formulation Sean was offered a contract for 15 sessions of cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) spaced at weekly
intervals, which he accepted. Therapy focused primarily on DP and secondarily on his comorbid anxiety and depression. The treatment
programme developed by Hunter et al. (2003) was used in this case. The programme consisted of three phases.
Phase 1
In the first five sessions the objective was to reduce Sean's overall level of distress and increase his level of activity, general motivation and
mood. This was achieved by means of (1) psychoeducation, (2) normalizing his experience and (3) inviting him to monitor his DP symptoms.
The first two sessions were devoted to psychoeducation and normalization.
Psychoeducation
Information regarding DPD gathered from the literature was shared with Sean. This involved explaining that transient symptoms of DP are
very common in the "normal" population, particularly during states of extreme anxiety. Sean found it reassuring to learn that symptoms of
DP are very rarely accompanied by psychotic symptoms (e.g. auditory hallucinations), and that in most cases several years go on without an
escalation to a psychotic illness.
Normalization
The experience of DP was reframed in terms of a normal human reaction, a protective mechanism for dealing with overwhelming states

of anxiety by distancing oneself. Sean experienced an enormous sense of relief when he was told that what he felt were incomprehensible
symptoms signalling madness actually had a clinical name and could be explained as a normal human reaction.
Symptom monitoring
Sessions 3-5 were dedicated to symptom monitoring. Sean was invited to keep a DP symptoms record. Sean focused initially on episodes
where his DP was particularly distressing. This technique helped the clinician determine the idiosyncratic precipitants of DP and Sean's
reactions to DP in terms of thoughts and behaviour. Sean was asked to describe the circumstances that increased or decreased his symptoms
(i.e. alleviating and exacerbating factors) and he jotted down the specific fears (i.e. catastrophic attributions) they activated. In order to
identify the presence of avoidance and safety behaviours, he wrote down what he thought helped to prevent his fears (e.g. going mad).
Through this intervention Sean became aware of the link between his behaviour and thoughts and the level of his DP. He discovered that his
symptoms increased in situations where he anticipated an episode of uncontrolled DP (e.g. while driving, when socializing and in crowded
public places, particularly where there were fluorescent lighting). He also noticed a decrease in symptoms when he managed to focus his
attention "outside" (e.g. when watching a film that he enjoyed). This helped Sean to appreciate that his symptoms were not uncontrollable.
The DP record highlighted a general low level of activity, which was contributing to his low mood and motivation and set the scene for a
pattern of symptom-focus. At this point a behavioural programme of scheduling of pleasant activities was initiated to improve Sean's overall
mood.
Phase 2
In sessions 6-13 the efforts centred on effecting change in factors thought to maintain his symptoms (i.e. avoidance, safety behaviours,
catastrophic attributions and checking of symptoms). This phase involved three specific interventions that were individually tailored.
Firstly, a number of behavioural interventions (i.e. graded exposure, video-recording and role-play) were used to reduce avoidance of feared

situations and the use of safety behaviours when dealing with them. Using the DP record Sean identified a number of situations in which
he anticipated an episode of uncontrolled DP and therefore avoided. These included driving alone, socializing with friends and attending
crowded places. The DP record revealed a series of safety behaviours that Sean used in order to prevent feared outcomes (i.e. developing
Alzheimer's, going mad and people noticing his madness) in these situations. These included keeping a fixed expression, keeping very still,
making minimal eye contact, and going to look in the mirror to see if he had changed.
In sessions 6-9 two behavioural strategies used in CBT for social anxiety, videotaping of social interactions and role-play with and
without safety behaviours, were used to reduce avoidance (CBT for social anxiety is described in Chapter 13). In the initial role-play Sean
identified two safety behaviours that he would "drop" during the exercise (i.e. saying the right thing and making little eye contact). This
was operationalized in terms of looking into the clinician's eyes during conversation and asking for details regarding one of the clinician's
arguments, thus avoiding saying "the right thing." In order to make the role-play more real, the clinician invited Sean to voluntarily induce
an episode of DP. A list of situations that normally induce symptoms of DP - such as fatigue, fluorescent lighting, and staring at his face in a
mirror - were presented. Sean chose to stare at his face in the mirror, which soon induced a tolerable exacerbation of his DP. Role-playing with
and without safety behaviours was video-recorded and helped to reassure him that his symptoms were undetectable to others. This then
served to dispel his belief that his safety behaviours prevented him from going mad or developing Alzheimer's dementia. More importantly,
role-playing helped Sean appreciate the role of safety behaviours in increasing his DP symptoms by way of simply "going through the
motions of the social interactions," creating a sense of emotional detachment from others (especially friends and family). Sean initially
found these exercises anxiety-provoking but over time he reported feeling more in control of his experiences.
Second, two cognitive strategies (i.e. task concentration training and cognitive restructuring) were used to facilitate the reduction of self-
focused attention (SFA: constantly checking his memory and his feelings of unreality) and modification of catastrophic attributions.


Reductions of SFA
In sessions 10-13 Sean underwent a programme of task concentration training (TCT) and cognitive restructuring. In the first stage of
training, the clinician drew Sean's attention to the fact that his pattern of attending to internal stimuli, checking whether his feeling of
unreality were still present (e.g. "Is this real? Am I losing my mind? Let's check if I can remember things from the past."), reduced his
threshold for perception of threat serving to increase his level of anxiety. This in turn led to a sense of emotional detachment and an increase
in DP, thus creating a vicious circle. Informed by the DP record, Sean gained insight into the time he dedicated to (1) internal stimuli (i.e.
SFA) (e.g. "Am I going mad? Is this real?"), (2) external task-related stimuli (e.g. listening to a conversation in a social situation or a lecture
in college) and (3) external task-irrelevant stimuli (e.g. the colour of the walls in the classroom). Once he understood the difference between
these types of attention, a number of increasingly complex exercises were carried out in therapy (i.e. non-threatening situations). In the first
exercise, Sean sat with his back to the clinician while the clinician told him a 2-minute neutral story. Sean was encouraged to concentrate on
the story and to summarize the same story afterwards. He was also asked to estimate the percentage of attention that he directed towards
observing his unreality feelings, the task and towards the environment while listening. In the second exercise Sean listened to a similar
story but this time he alternated attention between the task of listening and his feelings of unreality, thus gaining control over refocusing
attention towards external task-related stimuli. In the last exercise, it was Sean who spoke while concentrating on observing if the therapist
was listening and understanding his message. TCT was subsequently practised in everyday non-threatening situations (e.g. at home talking
to his family) and everyday life (e.g. while driving, in college, etc.). After 4 weeks of practice Sean was surprised with the results, reporting
that when he focused his attention outwards, he was able to feel a natural flow of emotions, feeling familiar warmth towards his friends and
family.

Challenging catastrophic assumptions
Using the thought record it became clear that Sean's fears regarding DP symptoms revolved around three topics including (1) fear of going
mad, (2) fear of forgetting about himself and others and (3) fears of having permanent brain damage (e.g. Alzheimer's disease/tumour).
Classic cognitive interventions were used to challenge his thoughts. For example, in relation to his fear of going mad Sean was asked to
describe in concrete terms what this would entail. Sean said that he would "start hearing voices and start shouting in public." Once his fear
was operationalized, a number of techniques were used to challenge this thought. Sean generated evidence for and against his thought and
came up with an alternative balanced belief. In addition, Sean agreed to carry out a behavioural experiment in therapy in order to test the
validity of his hypothesis. Using the same technique of staring into the mirror in order to generate a state of heightened DP, Sean tested the
validity of his feared prediction.
With regard to his fear of forgetting about himself, Sean believed that during an episode of DP he would not be able to remember anything
about his past and would find it difficult to think about his future. While experiencing DP Sean engaged in casual conversation with the
clinician, giving him details about a past holiday (more than 10 years ago) and about his future plans while the clinician took notes about the
level of his detail. Sean realized that despite experiencing intense DP, he was still able to recall past events with a great deal of specificity. Sean
agreed that this would be atypical for cases of Alzheimer's disease.
Phase 3
The last three sessions involved modifying Sean's core beliefs regarding his vulnerability to mental illness. In addition, Sean summarized
and consolidated what he had learned and, together with his therapist, worked on a plan for relapse prevention. Sean attended a follow-up
booster session 8 weeks after his episode of treatment, at which he reported overall good maintenance of gains, based on self-report and self-
rating measures of DP (i.e. DES and CDS).

Introduction
Depersonalization disorder (DPD) is a chronic condition in which the patient experiences, among other symptoms, a strong subjective
feeling of being emotionally and physically numbed, leading to a profoundly distressing sense of unreality about the self and the external
world, a state of feeling estranged, detached or disconnected from their own being, their surroundings and people, especially those familiar
to them, so as to appear to lack all personal significance. While it is still relatively unknown to many clinicians, including clinical
psychologists, this mental disorder is most certainly not new. In fact, the concept and the term of DP were already introduced in the late 19th
century (Dugas, 1898; Krishaber, 1872), and its phenomenological description back then, other than being much richer, is virtually
indistinguishable from those of contemporaneous cases. Depersonalization can present as a symptom secondary to another primary
psychiatric or medical disorder or as an independent disorder in its own right. Epidemiological studies described later in the chapter
estimate that DP, as a symptom, is extremely common and, as a full-blown disorder, affects 1-3% of the general adult population, implying
that it is as prevalent as other more thoroughly documented conditions such as obsessive-compulsive disorder (1-2%; Bebbington, 1998) or
schizophrenia (0.5-1.5%; APA, 2000). This, together with the recent publication of empirical studies from independent clinical research
centres of a large series of cases suffering from chronic DP disorder, makes the existence of this distinct disorder an unquestionable clinical
fact (Sierra, 2009). However, in spite of this evidence, the assumption that DP as a distinct disorder is extremely rare continues to prevail
among psychiatrists and other clinicians, which is echoed in the ICD-10 (WHO, 1993), which describes it as a rare disorder. Regrettably,
further illustrations of this unjustified assumption abound. For example, the results of an analysis of all medical diagnoses of 1.567 million
persons attending an outpatient health service found a 1-year prevalence for the diagnosis of DP disorder of only 0.007%, which the authors
indicate "demonstrates a dramatic neglect of depersonalization in clinical routine" (Michal et al., 2010a). Also, as Sierra (2009) points out,
the Office of Rare Diseases at the National Institutes of Health (ORD, 2007) lists DP as a rare disease (i.e. a disease affecting fewer than

200,000 people in the US population), a prevalence far lower than the estimates of rigorous epidemiological studies. Notwithstanding this
situation, the last 15 years have witnessed an explosion in the study of DP disorder, culminating in the establishment of specialized clinics
and research programmes on both sides of the Atlantic devoting their efforts to the understanding of the disorder and the development of
effective treatments. In the UK, the Depersonalisation Research Unit at the Maudsley Hospital in London, led by Anthony David and Mauricio
Sierra, was established in 1998 and takes referrals from within the local NHS trust, throughout the UK and internationally (Phillips et al.,
2001a, 2001b; Senior et al., 2001). On the other side of the Atlantic, led by Daphne Simeon and her colleagues, the Depersonalization and
Dissociation Research Program at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York is another clinic uniquely devoted to the study of
dissociation in general and DP disorder in particular. In addition to these two centres, the influential clinical research carried out, primarily
in the last decade, by the German group of Matthias Michal and his colleagues in the Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and
Psychotherapy at University Medical Centre of the Johannes Guttenberg University Mainz also deserves special mention.
Since the 1990s, the Internet has provided a virtual venue where thousands of individuals suffering from DP disorder can network and
share their human story and clinical features of their presentation and obtain information regarding the condition and existing treatment
options. In 2000, Jeffrey Abugel, a journalist and author (Abugel, 2010; Simeon & Abugel, 2006), who himself suffered from DP disorder,
created the website http://depersonalization.info, which is still operative and to date has recorded in excess of 200,000 visits. Since then the
number of websites and forums dedicated to the condition has proliferated (e.g. http://DPselfhelp.com, http://dreamchild.net, http://
depersonalization-home.com, etc.). The big screen has also played its role in bringing the condition to a relatively wider audience. Two
autobiographical films, Tarnation (2003) by director Jonathan Caouette and Numb (2007) by director Harry Goldberg, depict the experiences
of DP in two individuals who, like in the case illustrated in this chapter, become afflicted by this condition after smoking marijuana. Further
illustration of this renewed interest is the fact that since the publication of the first edition of this manual in 2006, no less than five
monographic books on DP disorder have been published, including Feeling Unreal: Depersonalization Disorder and the Loss of the Self (Simeon
& Abugel, 2006); Overcoming Depersonalization and Feelings of Unreality (Baker et al., 2007); Depersonalization: A New Look at a Neglected

Syndrome (Sierra, 2009); Overcoming Depersonalization Disorder: A Mindfulness and Acceptance Guide to Conquering Feelings of Numbness and
Unreality (Nezirogly & Donnelly, 2010); and most recently, Stranger to My Self (Abugel, 2010). Yet, it is fair to say that DP disorder remains a
poorly understood and relatively understudied mental disorder among clinical psychologists. As a unique disorder, the concept of
depersonalization only appeared in the fourth edition of the Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology, a classic psychology reference for over three
decades (Blanco-Campal, 2010). To the best of the author's knowledge, the present volume is the only clinical psychology handbook, covering
a range of mental disorders in the adult population, which dedicates an entire chapter to this intriguing, fascinating and
phenomenologically complex mental condition that is endured by millions of people worldwide. This chapter intends to provide
psychologists in clinical training and those already qualified a clear guidance to enable them to understand the disorder, detect it and deliver
theoretically sound psychological treatments to those affected by this distressing and often debilitating condition.
Definitions and spectrum of severity
Depersonalization (DP) is a complex syndrome in which the essential characteristic is the patient's complaint of a disturbing qualitative
change in the conscious experience of their mental activity, body and surroundings, which are bestowed with a distressing and egodystonic
sense of detachment, unreality and estrangement. Patients affected by DP report that while their internal mental processes and the world
around them remain objectively the same, these feel different and no longer seem to be connected to the emotional feelings and personal
meaning which the patient expects should accompany their experience. Patients often complain that their mental activity and behaviour
are alien, that their body appears foreign and robotic, that their surroundings appear remote and unreal, and they feel a profoundly
distressing emotional disconnection from their loved ones. Among the various clinical symptoms of this complex phenomenon, a frequent
manifestation is an attenuation or loss of the capacity to experience emotions (e.g. loss of affection and empathy) - apart from the intense
suffering caused by this very sense of loss – even though the capacity to externally express emotion is spared. The patient retains a sense
of reality and insight and is at all times acutely aware of the subjective nature of these changes, which often results in severe psychological

distress and unrelenting fears of mental insanity, often triggering a compulsive need for self-observation of their physical and psychological
self, in an effort to prevent the feared outcome of going crazy, losing control and/or suffering irreversible brain damage. Paradoxically,
however, DP is perhaps the opposite of insanity, and it is in fact the patient's compulsive need to test their mental sanity, in a manner likened
to an exercise of "obsessive self scrutiny" (Torch, 1978), much like a hypochondriac compulsively searches for and checks perceived signs of
physical health, which is critical to the perpetuation of their experience of DP.
Clinical descriptions and experiential narratives comparable to what we now know as the syndrome of DP feature in the medical and
psychological literature since the early 19th century (e.g. Griesinger, 1845; Zeller, 1938), although the concept of DP, as a unique disorder,
was only first systematically described in 1872 by the Hungarian Maurice Krishaber (1836-1883), an eye, ear, nose and throat specialist who
used the term "cerebro-cardiac neuropathy" (Krishaber, 1872). The term DP was subsequently coined by the French psychologist Ludovic
Dugas (1857-1943) in the late 19th century (Dugas, 1898), who in turn borrowed it from the Swiss philosopher Henri-Frederick Amiel
(1821-1881), who had used it in his personal diary, Journal Intime (Amiel, 1933, p. 275). Depersonalization is currently defined in DSM-5 as
"experiences of unreality, detachment, or being an outside observer with respect to one's thoughts, feelings, sensations, body, or actions (e.g.,
perceptual alterations, distorted sense of time, unreal or absent self, emotional and/or physical numbing)" (APA, 2013, p. 302).
Depersonalization is often accompanied by the symptoms of derealization (DR), a term that was introduced in the early 20th century to
refer to an aspect of DP. Mayer-Gross (1935) ascribed the coining of the term to the Dublin-born, Irish psychiatrist, Edward Mapother (1881-
1940), who worked at the Maudsley Hospital between wars (Sierra, 2009; Sierra & Berrios, 2001). With some exceptions (e.g. Coons, 1996;
Fleiss et al., 1975), DR has traditionally been viewed as a subset of DP (Jacobs & Bovasso, 1992) and although cases of pure DR have been
described (Baker et al., 2003), the two experiences tend to coexist. Derealization is currently defined in DSM-5 as "experiences of unreality
or detachment with respect to surroundings (e.g., individuals or objects are experienced as unreal, dreamlike, foggy, lifeless, or visually
distorted)" (APA, 2013, p. 302). In this chapter, when used in isolation, the term DP makes reference to, not just the experience of DP/DR, but
to the rich symptom complex that characterizes this phenomenon, denoting its conceptualization as a syndrome.


Depersonalization can manifest along a spectrum of severity, spanning from the "non-pathological," often benign, fleeting or transient
experiences, without clinical significance, occurring in healthy individuals, particularly youth; to the "pathological" forms, where the
various symptoms cause clinically significant distress. In its pathological forms, DP may manifest as a chronic, disabling and clinically
significant phenomenon, either as a symptom in the context of another primary condition, referred to as "secondary or symptomatic
depersonalization" or as a full-blown disorder that is severe, disabling and may persist chronically, in which the term "primary
depersonalization disorder" is warranted. Specifically, the term "secondary depersonalization" applies to cases where clinically significant
symptoms of DP arise only in the context of a life-threatening situation, a primary psychiatric condition, drug intoxication or general
medical condition, most frequently a neurological condition. Depersonalization, as a symptom, is extremely common and has been
described as being the third most common psychiatric symptom behind depression and anxiety (Stewart, 1974). Depersonalization disorder
is reserved for the most severe, disabling and often chronic pathological form of DP, in which the episodes of depersonalization are
recurrent or persistent; are independent (i.e. do not occur exclusively in their context) from a general medical condition, the effects of drug
intoxication or another concomitant or pre-existing mental illness, therefore following an independent clinical course; and are associated
with significant life distress and/or dysfunction, impacting on patients' quality of life and their daily functioning. The first to propose the
existence of a distinct primary clinical group of DP was Shorvon et al. (1946), who described a remarkable series of 66 cases which the
author claimed could not be attributed to any other coexisting psychiatric condition and "will not fit into no other diagnosis than the
depersonalization syndrome" (p. 781). It is this most severe pathological form of DP that is captured in the case described in this chapter.
Primary depersonalization disorder (DPD) is currently labelled by DSM-5 as depersonalization/derealization disorder (APA, 2013) and by
ICD-10 as depersonalization-derealization syndrome (WHO, 1993). Table 18.1 contains DSM-5 and ICD-10 diagnostic criteria.


Clinical features
Depersonalization (DP) is best conceptualized as a syndrome rather than as a symptom (Sierra, 2009). While DSM-5, in an effort to do justice
to the syndrome concept of depersonalization, notes that "the unitary symptom of depersonalization consists of several symptom factors:
anomalous body experiences (i.e., unreality of self and perceptual alterations); emotional or physical numbing; and temporal distortions
with anomalous subjective recall" and goes on to describe commonly associated symptoms (APA, 2013, p. 303), it is fair to say that the
operational definitions of both the DSM-5 (APA, 2013) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1993) continue to fall short of capturing the rich and complex
phenomenological characteristics that typify this syndrome. A systematic comparison of a large series of historical and current cases of
DPD demonstrates that the phenomenology and clinical features of DP have remained stable over the past century, revealing a cluster of
five most frequently reported symptoms, including: (1) visual derealization; (2) altered body experience; (3) loss of agency feelings; (4)
emotional numbing; and (5) changes in the subjective experiencing of memory (Sierra & Berrios, 2001). In line with this finding, the clinical
features presented by two independent large samples of patients diagnosed with DPD, described by two independent research centres, are
remarkably similar, supporting the notion of a remarkable clinical homogeneity of this condition (Baker et al., 2003; Simeon et al., 2003a).
Empirical evidence supporting the conceptualization of DP as a syndrome comes from two independent factor analysis studies using the
CDS (Sierra et al., 2005; Simeon et al., 2008), designed to capture the symptomatic complexity of the disorder, which found strikingly similar
factorial solutions. These findings give credit to the view that rather than resulting from a unitary dimensional construct, DP represents
the expression of several distinct underlying dimensions with perhaps distinct underlying aetiological mechanisms (Sierra, 2009). Taken
together, the historical and empirical evidence suggest that DP is a phenomenologically complex syndrome, characterized by at least four
distinct symptom domains, including (1) desomatization (anomalous body experience), (2) de-affectualization (emotional numbing), (3)


derealization (alienation from surroundings) and (4) deideation (anomalies in subjective cognitive functioning) (Davidson, 1966; Sierra,
2009; Taylor, 1982).
Desomatization: anomalous body experiences
This symptom makes reference to the patient's complaint of a qualitative change or alteration in the manner in which they experience their
bodies. It is characterized by a subjective diminution, loss or alteration of bodily sensations and a sense of disembodiment, in spite of the
fact that patients retain intact interoceptive awareness and body perception (Michal et al., 2014b). Historically, desomatization has been
found to be very prevalent in chronic DPD (Mayer-Gross, 1935; Shorvon et al., 1946), and in a recent study of 407 patients with DPD, 66.2%
of the sample presented this symptom (Sierra & Berrios, 2001). The different facets of anomalous body experience can be subdivided into
several related concepts: (1) lack of body ownership feelings; (2) feelings of loss of agency; (3) feelings of disembodiment; (4) somatosensory
distortions; and (5) heightened self-observation.
Lack of body ownership feelings
This symptom makes reference to the patient's subjective experience of an absence of, or diminution in the ability to experience a
relationship between their body and their sense of self. A patient may complain of experiencing parts or all of their body as alien. Often
patients describe the experience of looking in the mirror and feeling detached from one's image, and having an urge to continue looking
in the mirror while simultaneously groping parts of their body in order to reconnect the body and the mind and in the process reassure
themselves of their existence. This experience is strikingly similar to that described by patients with hemi-asomatognosia, typically
resulting from brain lesions affecting the right parietal lobe, leading French neuropsychiatrist Jean Lhermitte to describe DP as a form of
"total asomatognosia" (Lhermitte, 1939; Sierra, 2009). Patients may attempt to describe their experience in the following terms: "It is as if I
were a phantom body," "my hands seem not to belong to me."


Feelings of "loss of agency"
This symptom goes beyond the subjective alteration in the experience of the body and makes reference to the qualitative change in the
subjective experience of owning one's acts and of being an agent of mental and motor activity (Sierra, 2009; Stephens & Graham, 2000).
Patients frequently complain about an absence of agency feelings so that their behaviour feels automatic and robot-like. They may report
watching themselves from a distance and feeling "as if" one part of them is acting while the other is observing (e.g. "I would notice my hand
and feet moving, but as if they did not belong to me and were moving automatically."). Patients may refer to a sense of not being in full
control of their voice, movements or behaviour and feeling detached from body parts or the whole body. Individuals may also fear that their
identity is vanishing or disappearing.
Feelings of disembodiment
This symptom makes reference to the patient's disturbing subjective experience that their psychological self is localized outside their
physical body boundaries, although this is rarely accompanied by autoscopic experiences (i.e. a visual hallucination of oneself as
experienced from the extra-personal space). Also, at odds with a full-blown out-of-body experience, where the person describes a feeling
of occupying a different location in the extra-personal space, patients report a feeling of "not being there" (e.g. "I am here but not here."),
observing oneself as if from outside, in most cases without reference to any particular location in space (Sierra, 2009).
Somatosensory distortions
This symptom makes reference to a range of subjective perceptual distortions of the body such as the patient's complaint that body parts,
often their hands, have changed in size and that their body feels weightless or lighter (e.g. as if walking on a cloud). This is a rare symptom,
not considered characteristic of DP, and seen more frequently in conditions such as schizophrenia, epilepsy or migraine; therefore it may be
useful in the differential diagnosis of these conditions (Sierra, 2009).


Heightened self-observation
This symptom makes reference to the patient's subjective feeling of being a detached observer of their own behaviour (Sierra, 2009). As early
as 1914, Shilder noted that all depersonalized patients observe themselves continuously and with great zeal; they compare their present
dividedness-within-themselves with their previous oneness-with-themselves. Self observation is compulsive with these patients (Shilder,
1914, 1935). Patients often describe a sort of division of their subjective awareness, with one that observes while the other goes through the
motions (e.g. "It is as if I was looking inside my head instead of outside," "I was completely unable to tell whether I myself was still present or
whether I was the part which had gone. In short there were two different beings, the one watching the other"; Roberts, 1960). Patients
develop an obsessive need to observe the self constantly, finding themselves stuck in a chronic self-observation (e.g. "I look in the mirror and
I don't see me. I don't know who it is that I see and I don't know where the real me has gone... I spend all day checking myself and it's never
me"). In keeping with this the nature of these clinical features, studies reveal a high prevalence of obsessional traits in patients with primary
DPD, including rigidity, over-consciousness, ruminative tendencies, meticulousness, immaturity, insecurity and sensitivity. For example,
Shorvon et al. (1946) found that 46% of his classic series of 66 cases presenting with primary DPD presented with marked obsessional
personality traits, and Roth (1959) found strong premorbid obsessional traits in 75% his cases. This led Torch (1978) to postulate a specific
variant of depersonalization that he referred to as "the intellectual obsessive depersonalization syndrome," assigning obsessional traits a
casual role in the condition. Heightened self-observation is considered a critical factor contributing to the precipitation and perpetuation of
DP, and this symptom is currently the target of different psychological approaches to the treatment of DPD described later. In fact, many
individuals with DP report that the thought that they must be depersonalized often precedes their experience (e.g. "when I am sometimes
more or less normal, I have to keep analyzing my feelings"; "sitting by the fire I suddenly realized: I was me! I suddenly got outside myself and
saw myself. I am since then absolutely conscious of being conscious"; Mayer-Gross, 1935). The case example presented in this chapter
illustrates this phenomenological feature.


De-affectualization: emotional numbing
This symptom makes reference to the patients' subjective experience of the loss of diminution in the experiencing of emotional feelings and
is a core phenomenological manifestation of DP. Emotions may seem to lack spontaneity and subjective validity. Patients may describe their
experience in the following terms: "my emotions are gone, nothing affects me"; "I am unable to have any emotions, everything is detached
from me." Most patients often report different degrees of attenuated emotional experience, including a loss of affection, pleasure, fear or
disgust (Sierra, 2009). Rather than an inability to experience emotional states, what characterizes de-affectualization is an inability to imbue
perceived objects, concrete situations and mental activity with the emotional feelings that the person expects would normally colour them
(e.g. "Music always moves me, but now it might as well be someone mincing potatoes."). Paradoxically, however, in contrast to this lack of
subjective emotional feelings, patients demonstrate an intact motor expression of emotional feelings and, furthermore, their pervasive
emotional numbing coexists with intense distress and suffering (e.g. "I don't have any emotions - it makes me so unhappy") (Medford, 2012).
An alteration in attentional processes has been postulated to explain this apparent contradiction, where a disproportionate focus on the
strangely altered inner feelings, at the expense of attending to the external world, leads to a combination of emotional distress, arising from
the unpleasantness of the DP experience itself, coupled with reduced emotional reactivity, experiencing the world as distant, lifeless, unreal
and lacking in emotional content (Medford, 2012). In addition, patients often complain of an inability to experience empathy for others. In
line with this subjective complaint, an empirical study showed that while patients with DPD did not differ from healthy controls in their
capacity to understand another person's emotional state (i.e. cognitive empathy), they showed an inability to experience a congruous
emotional response (i.e. affective empathy) (Lawrence et al., 2007). These findings were replicated in a single case study combining
behavioural and neurobiological measures of empathy (Sedeño et al., 2014). In a similar vein, other studies have demonstrated that patients
with DPD demonstrate high levels of alexithymia, characterized by difficulties identifying and describing feelings, a clinical feature that was
significantly predictive of the clinical diagnosis of the disorder (Lemche et al., 2013a; Simeon, 2009).


Derealization
This symptom makes reference to patients' distressing and often threatening subjective feeling of unreality from the world around them,
encompassing objects, places (e.g. "Streets I knew seem as if I had never been there.") and people (e.g. "when I look at my parents I know who
they are, but at the same time they feel different, as if they were people I don't really know"). The experiential narratives of patients with DPD
suggest that subjective experience of DR is particularly pronounced in relation to things perceived (i.e. objects, places and people) that are
most familiar to the patient. Patients frequently describe the experience of something between their eyes and the outside world (e.g. curtain,
blind or glass wall); for example, "It's like living inside a bubble," "It is as if I am living in a film, it is all black and white and 2D"; "It is like
walking around with a goldfish bowl on your head." DR is often experienced in the visual modality (e.g. "I see things as if they were two-
dimensional, without depth."), although it may also be experienced in other sensory modalities (e.g. objects feel strange to touch; sounds
come from the distance, muffled and distorted). It is not uncommon for patients to attribute their feelings of unreality to a lack of emotional
feelings, which suggests that the underlying mechanism responsible for their subjective experience is the inability to attach emotional
colour to the things perceived (i.e. places, objects and people), leading to a distressing sense of feeling cut off from the world around them,
and to a profoundly distressing emotional disconnection from their most loved ones. Regarding the perception of faces, empirical studies
from the field of behavioural neurosciences indicate the existence of two parallel and independent pathways involved in the processing of
faces, one that allows the semantic recognition (i.e. who the person is) and another that assigns a feeling of familiarity to the face. Contrary
to cases of prosopagnosia, in which the inability to recognize and therefore identify known faces coexists with an implicit emotional
recognition of familiar faces, individuals with DPD demonstrate the reverse pattern, whereby familiar faces are effortlessly identified and
yet patients report a disturbing feeling of emotional detachment and unfamiliarity with the face (e.g. "when I look at my parents I know who
they are, but at the same time they feel different, as if they were people I don't really know"), in what could be described a non-delusional
version of the Capgras syndrome (Brighetti et al., 2007).

De-ideation: anomalies in subjective experience of cognitive functions
This symptom makes reference to the patients' complaints of a subjective distortion regarding their cognitive functioning affecting, in
particular, their ability to recollect past personal events, generate images and experience the passage of time.
Subjective memory complaints
Patients often complain that autobiographical memories (i.e. past personal events) appear to have lost their personal meaning and sense of
familiarity and are bestowed with a feeling of unreality (e.g. "I can remember things, but it seems as if what I remember did not really happen
to me"). While patients retain the ability to recall the facts of the specific autobiographical episode, their memory is devoid of the distinct
feelings and emotional colouring that accompanies the act of recollection (Sharot et al., 2004), that normally confers them a subjective
feeling of reality and familiarity. This dissociation between knowing the personal past and remembering it by way of re-experiencing
the event and the feelings associated with it, is what in neuropsychological terms are referred to as the know/remember components
of autobiographical memory (Gardiner & Java, 1991). In keeping with the phenomenological experience associated with the recall of
traumatic memories (Kenny & Bryant, 2006), distressing memories in depression (Williams & Moulds, 2006) and memories associated with
subjectively threatening social encounters in cases of social anxiety (D'Argembeau et al., 2006), patients with DPD often report remembering
past personal episodes from a detached observer's viewpoint (i.e. from the outside) rather than a participant's perspective (i.e. through the
person's eyes). Patients' phenomenological experience of emotional numbing and feelings of unreality regarding their memories have found
empirical support in a cognitive and functional neuroimaging (fMRI) study (Medford et al., 2006), which found that compared to normal
controls, patients with DPD did not benefit from the enhancing effect that emotions have on the recognition of emotionally neutral words
encoded in an emotive context (i.e. contextual emotional memory), showing similar neural activation patterns during the encoding of
emotional aversive and neutral words. Nevertheless, patients with DPD did exhibit an "emotional enhancement" of recognition memory for

overtly emotive words, which is in line with the results of a more recent study showing an enhanced memory effect for particularly potent
emotional verbal material (Montagne et al., 2007).
Imagery complaints
Mental imagery is the mental invention or recreation of an experience that resembles the experience of actually perceiving an object or event
(Finke, 1989). While individuals with DPD demonstrate intact visual object and space perception (Lambert et al., 2001b) and retain their
ability to recognize and identify faces, including their own (Ketay et al., 2014; Lemche et al., 2013b), and places (Störring, 1933), in rare cases
patients report the absolute loss of the power of imagination, and more frequently they complain of a subjective alteration or inability to
evoke the mental images of things perceived, which appear pale and colourless. This in turn is likely to affect the patient's ability to recollect
autobiographical events (e.g. "I can't picture anything. I'm not able to picture my family, my home - all seems a long way away"; "when I
close my eyes, I can't picture a blue sky or blue sea. I can think it but cannot see it with my mind"). This selective subjective alteration of
visual imagery in the context of visual perception appears to support the double dissociation between these two cognitive processes found
in neuropsychological studies (Behrmann et al., 1992). Imagery complaints are also a core feature characterizing DPD, and experiential
narratives of this symptom exist since the late 19th century, when Dugas reported on a patient who could not mentally visualize an absent
person, for example his parents and it was in fact the realization of this incapacity that marked the onset of his acute depersonalization
(Dugas, 1898; Sierra & Berrios, 1996). Supporting this very early and incisive clinical observation, a more recent experimental study using
self-report measures of vividness of visual and movement imagery found that patients with primary DPD showed a disproportionate
impairment in their ability to generate visual scenes involving people relative to objects or scenery and in their ability to imagine themselves
making movements as opposed to another person making them (Lambert et al., 2001b).


Complaints of changes in the experiencing of time
This symptom makes reference to the patients' subjective changes in the perception of time, regarding both, the rate of passage and duration
of time (i.e. time is experienced slower, faster, or at a standstill: "time seems like rubber," "time goes very slow, not as it used to be") as
well as the perspective of time (i.e. inability or diminution of the ability to conceive past or future: "time just passes, I don't see any future";
"yesterday seems years ago"). While it is not considered a core feature of DPD, it was already captured in the narratives of early historical
cases of the disorder (Oberndorf, 1941; Shorvon et al., 1946) and is presently considered an under-reported symptom and an essential
component to a cohesive sense of self, whereby the experience of "time perspective" functions as a frame of self-reference without which
the experience of self becomes distorted and unfamiliar (Freeman & Melges, 1978; Sierra & Berrios, 2001; Simeon et al., 2007). While in
extreme cases patients report a total loss of the ability to experience time, or the experience of existing outside of time (e.g. "I can't explain,
all is timeless, unchanging, hopeless," "I had no feeling of time at all - time was nothing to me"), more commonly patients complain that
events that they have experienced recently feel remote and distant (e.g. "If I do anything in the morning it seems like weeks ago"). In contrast
to these remarkable and often distressing narratives, patients with DPD demonstrate intact ability to estimate time intervals on objective
experimental tasks (Cappon & Banks, 1969). A recent study found that relative to controls patients with primary DPD manifest greater
temporal disintegration, which was related to prominent absorption rather than to the core symptoms of DPD (Simeon et al., 2007).
The experience of mind emptiness
This symptom makes reference to the patients' subjective experience of their mind being empty of thoughts or feeling unable to think
(e.g. "it is as if my mind is blank") which appear phenomenologically similar to the experience of a psychological state of absorption.
Patients frequently complain of memory and attentional difficulties, reporting feeling overburdened by stimuli and that their mind
wanders without focus often feeling drawn to irrelevant stimuli. In support of these subjective cognitive complaints, the combined results

of two neuropsychological studies revealed a distinct neuropsychological profile in patients with DPD, characterized by specific cognitive
disturbances in the allocate perceptual and attentional processes in the early stages of information processing, in particular in the ability to
effortfully control the focus of attention. This results in defective performance on tests of spatial reasoning and immediate memory for both
auditory-verbal and visual material, in the context of spared working memory and delayed recall and intact overall intellectual functioning
(Guralnik et al., 2000, 2007). Similarly, a more recent study found that DPD is associated with altered attentional mechanisms in relation
to the capacity to orientation of spatial attention (Adler et al., 2014). And a psychophysiological study found that "normal" individuals
experiencing transient experiences of DP/DR showed significantly decreased amplitudes of the P300 component of Event-Related Potentials,
indicative of a reduced capacity to allocate attentional resources on tests of immediate memory (Papageorgiou et al., 2002).
Non-pathological versus pathological forms of depersonalization: comparison of symptom profile
The differences found between the symptom profile of non-pathological and pathological forms of DP vary along four main dimension
of severity, including the frequency and duration of episodes, the number of symptoms present and the subjective intensity of these
symptoms (Sierra, 2009). In non-pathological cases the overall frequency of symptoms is lower; the overall duration of symptoms shorter;
and the subjective intensity of any of the symptoms reported increases in a linear fashion with the severity of DP. However, with regard to
specific symptoms, the frequency of derealization and emotional numbing appear to be similar along the spectrum of severity. Symptoms
such as desomatization and de-ideation are less frequently reported in the non-pathological form. Also, it appears that the nature of the
precipitants varies along the spectrum of severity. Thus, in mild cases of non-pathological forms of DP, characterized by one or few episodes
of short duration (i.e. seconds to minutes), the triggers are in most cases identifiable and include, most commonly, extreme fatigue, sensory
deprivation, medical illness, drug or alcohol intoxication, sleep deprivation and severe psychosocial stress. In up to 50% of cases with
primary DPD (Simeon et al., 2003a), the condition may become chronic in spite of any identifiable immediate trigger, and when factors are
identified the most common include severe stress, mental illness and drugs (Simeon et al., 2003a; Steinberg, 2001).


Classification: comparative nosology
The differences between the DSM-5 and ICD-10 diagnostic classification systems, illustrate the persisting theoretical disagreement
regarding the conceptualization and nosological classification of primary depersonalization disorder (DPD). While ICD-10 classifies
depersonalization-derealization syndrome under the vague heading of other neurotic disorders, DSM-5 classifies depersonalization/
derealization disorder (DP) as a dissociative disorder on the basis that although DP and derealization (DR) do occur in a range of affective
and anxiety disorders, they are highly prevalent in other dissociative disorders, resembling them more than differing from them (Spiegel et
al., 2011). Whereas DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) criteria separated the clinical phenomena of DP from DR (i.e. depersonalization disorder), and
reserved the term derealization unaccompanied by depersonalization for cases of pure DR, the DSM-5 merges the two clinical phenomena,
forming the new diagnostic category of depersonalization/derealization disorder. This is in recognition of the findings of recent research
studies showing no significant clinical differences between patients with predominant DP versus those with predominant DR, supporting
the notion that both DP and/or DP can characterize primary DPD (Spiegel et al., 2011). The fact that DR in the absence of DP is relatively rare
also justifies the decision to combine DP and DR in current DSM diagnostic criteria. A large-scale study of 204 cases of primary DPD found
that 73% of the individuals reported symptoms of both DP and DR and only 6% reported symptoms of DR as a single phenomenon (Baker et
al., 2003). Similarly, Lambert et al. (2001a) found only four cases of "pure DR" among 42 cases of both primary and secondary DPD.
From Table 18.1 it may be seen that DSM-5 and ICD-10 criteria are quite similar with both requiring (1) the presence of either
depersonalization or derealization or both for a definite diagnosis, (2) that individuals affected must have intact reality testing and good
insight into the psychological nature of their symptoms (i.e. the individual is aware that the symptoms of DP are a subjective experience
and not real), (3) while acknowledging its frequent comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders, both criteria note that to be primary, the
disorder must not be attributable to another mental disorder, and (4) should not be attributable to the effects of a substance or medical


condition. The most notable differences between the two diagnostic systems are (1) an explicit mention that the symptoms cause clinically
significant distress or impairment in social functioning, occupational or other important areas of functioning, (2) reflecting the notion that
DP should be conceptualized as a syndrome rather than a symptom, the DSM-5 makes efforts to address some of these symptom factors,
describing some of them in the diagnostic features section (APA, 2013, pp. 302-303).
Regarding the disagreement as to how to best conceptualize and classify DPD, Sierra (2009) points out that those advocating the
conceptualization of DPD as either a dissociative or an anxiety disorder typically emphasize one particular component of the syndrome
over the others in order to argue their views, both presenting different but valid observations. On the one hand, the dissociative view
posits that DPD bears the hallmark of dissociation, representing a disruption of the normal integration of conscious self-awareness and
control over one's mental processes (Spiegel et al., 2011). Within this theoretical camp, some propose that DP lies on a continuum
of dissociation, representing a mild pathological form, which suggests that all dissociative phenomena are qualitatively similar (Braun,
1997). In contrast, others propose the existence of two qualitatively distinct dissociative phenomena, with a possibly discrete underlying
biological/physiological basis: (1) dissociative compartmentalization (i.e. dissociative amnesia, dissociative fugue and dissociative identity
disorder), and (2) dissociative detachment (i.e. DP/DR), positing that using this dichotomy could lead to clearer case formulation and an
improved choice of treatment strategy (Holmes et al., 2005). On the other hand, the proponents of the anxiety view highlight the fact that
in DPD, comorbidity with other dissociative disorders is rare, whereas anxiety disorders in general and panic disorder in particular often
coexist with DPD. Hunter et al. (2003) list several aspects in which DPD differs from dissociative disorders; among others: (1) patients
with DPD rarely experience significant periods of memory loss, typically seen in dissociative amnesia, fugue states or dissociative identity
disorder; (2) whereas a lack of subjective awareness of change is the hallmark of true dissociation, in DPD sufferers are "frighteningly aware"
of their altered experience of themselves and/or their surroundings; and (3) unlike other dissociative disorders, where the pattern is one of
alternating between non-dissociative and dissociative states, in DPD the pattern is characterized by unremitting symptomatology.


However, there is evidence to suggest that although the high co-occurrence of anxiety disorders and pathological DP has been well
established across the spectrum of severity, ranging from non-clinical populations (Trueman, 1984a), psychiatric inpatients with a mix of
primary diagnoses (e.g. Noyes et al., 1977) and inpatients with primary DPD (Baker et al., 2003), it is also true that the association between
anxiety and depersonalization is complex and remains poorly understood (Sierra et al., 2012). Three epidemiological surveys support this
assertion. Taken together, the results of two studies investigating the prevalence rate of DPD in large community samples (n = 5,000, n =
2,512), found that while DP was strongly associated with anxiety, the shared variance of anxiety and severe DP was small, and DP was
clearly separated from symptoms of anxiety in a principal component analysis, supporting the distinctiveness of the psychopathological
syndromes of anxiety and DP (Michal et al., 2011a, 2011b). In a similar vein, a study with a large sample (n = 291) of cases attending
a specialist clinic and diagnosed with primary DPD found that a substantial cohort did not present with associated clinical symptoms of
anxiety; that a low but significant association between anxiety, as measured by the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), and DP was only seen
in mild cases of DP but not in those with severe DP; and that the levels of anxiety did not make a specific contribution to the clinical
features of DP. This prompted the authors to suggest that perhaps the role of anxiety in chronic DP has been overemphasized with their
findings favouring the view of DP as a valid nosological category in its own right (Sierra et al., 2012). Another study also found relative
differences between the anxiety symptom profiles, as measured by the BAI, of patients with DPD compared to those of a group presenting
with a variety of anxiety conditions, with the DPD group showing significantly lower scores on the panic subscale and higher scores on
the neurophysiological subscales of the BAI (Nestler et al., 2015). Taken together, it would appear that the current nosological ambiguity
surrounding DP is likely to continue for some time.
Epidemiology
Non-pathological depersonalization

Prevalence
Fleeting or transient and seemingly benign symptoms of DP are very common in the non-clinical population (Hunter et al., 2004). A series
of studies employing various methodologies and diagnostic criteria have reported 1-year prevalence rates of transient DP/DR ranging from
46 to 74% (Dixon, 1963; Jacobs & Bovasso, 1992) and lifetime prevalence rates of 26-70%, in mainly adult college student populations
(Sedman, 1966; Trueman, 1984a, 1984b). Regarding the prevalence of DP in the general population, a telephone survey in a random
southern rural US sample (n = 1,008) found a 1-year prevalence of 19.1% for symptoms of DP, 14.4% for DR and 23.4% for either symptom
(Aderibigbe et al., 2001).
Course
In non-clinical populations, transient episodes of DP can be triggered by a range of precipitating factors. These include:

1. Psychological factors, such as stress, anxiety, interpersonal difficulties, death of a loved one, depression or identity problems, and states
of release of tension following the resolution of a stressful situation.
2. Physiological factors, such as states of anomalous arousal, including hypnagogic states and sleep deprivation (Bliss et al., 1959; Cappon,
1968); sensory deprivation (Dittrich, 1975; Horowitz, 1964; Leonard et al., 1999; Reed & Sedman, 1964); mental fatigue (Mayer-Gross,
1935; Roberts, 1960); excessive physical activity (Trueman, 1984a); the effects of drug use including acute alcohol intoxication and
alcohol withdrawal (Raimo et al., 1999; Wenzel et al., 1996); illicit drug use, such as ecstasy (Cohen & Cocores, 1997; McGuire et al.,
1994), LSD (Waltzner, 1972) and more commonly cannabis (Mathew et al., 1993, 1999; Melges et al., 1970), with some cases going on
to develop cannabis-induced chronic DPD (Keshavan & Lishman, 1986; Medford et al., 2003; Moran, 1986; Simeon, 2009; Szymanski,
1981).


3. Religious experiences and states of mediation or relaxation (Castillo, 1990; Fewtrell, 1984; Kennedy, 1976).
In cases of transient episodes of DP, onset is typically in adolescence or early adulthood with no gender differences in college population
and a slightly higher rate in females in the general population (26.5 vs. 19.5 in men), which is largely in line with the findings in cases with
primary DPD, although relative to this pathological form symptom intensity is less severe. Of clinical relevance, while transient, episodes
of DP tend to be recurrent rather than one-off events, with one study on a college population reporting a median of five episodes during
the previous year (Sedman et al., 1966), and 19% of the general population reporting three or more episodes (Aderibigbe et al., 2001).
Furthermore, when recurrent they are associated with younger age, all of which suggests the existence of an individual predisposition
(Sierra, 2009).
Secondary depersonalization: comorbidity and prevalence
Even when DP is only a concomitant clinical symptom in the context of a primary psychiatric diagnosis, its detection and diagnosis is
of clinical relevance for several reasons (Sierra, 2009). First, neglecting the clinical discussion with patients of their distressing and often
disabling symptoms of DP can lead to poor therapeutic relationship and to non-compliance with treatment. Second, comorbid symptoms of
DP affect the clinical manifestation of the primary condition and often represents a clinical index of its severity and is associated with poorer
response to treatment and higher levels of overall morbidity in both adults and adolescents (Michal et al., 2009a; Mula et al., 2007). Third,
DP may respond to a number of medications, some of which are not typically used in regular psychiatric practice, and to DP-specific CBT
interventions.
Symptomatic depersonalization in acute stress
Transient peritraumatic symptoms of DP, that is, symptoms occurring at the time of acute and overwhelming anxiety in the face of a life-

threatening event, are relatively common in the non-clinical population. Two retrospective studies found similar rates of symptoms of
depersonalization at the time of the trauma, with 66% prevalence rates in survivors of "life-threatening danger" (Noyes & Kletti, 1977) and
60% in a sample reporting previous trauma (Shilony & Grossman, 1993), with a relatively lower rate of 31% found in victims of automobile
accidents who had required hospitalization (Noyes et al., 1977). Largely commensurate results have been reported in victims of natural
disasters such as earthquakes, with 25% of a sample of normal students admitting experiencing marked DP during and immediately after
the earthquake and 40% reporting DR (Cardena & Spiegel, 1993). Two theories have been posited to explain the high rates of DP during life-
threatening situations. The first, the protective view, suggests that DP at the time of trauma may represent a useful adaptive response. From
a neurobiological perspective, DP is conceptualized as a "hardwired" survival response in life-threatening situations in which the source of
danger is not known or cannot be localized and the individual feels out of control, generating a state of emotional disengagement while
preserving a state of vigilant alertness preventing maladaptive emotional behaviours such as the fight or flight response (Sierra & Berrios,
1998). From a psychoanalytic perspective, DP is viewed as a defence mechanism against intra-psychic conflict. In support of the protective
view, several psychophysiological and neuroimaging studies have found abnormal attenuated autonomic responses and decreased neural
activity in regions responsible for the generation of emotional responses in reaction to aversive stimuli, which are thought to represent the
neurobiological correlates of patients' subjective complaint of emotional numbness (Phillips & Sierra, 2003). The second view posits that DP
is a non-specific, dysfunctional, dissociative state divested of any protective function and in fact potentially maladaptive. In this vein, some
studies suggest that the presence of symptoms of DP at the time of trauma is an index of poor prognosis (e.g. Tall & Faber, 1997), and a meta-
analysis of 35 empirical studies found peritraumatic dissociation, which includes experiences of DP, to be a moderate risk factor for the
subsequent development of post-traumatic stress disorder (Breh & Seidler, 2007). However, it has been argued that perhaps peritraumatic
dissociation, rather than having a causal role in the development of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), may simply represent an acute
version of PTSD, being the degree of perceived threat to life that predisposes to both and the presence of symptoms such as confusion and

amnesia that impedes the protective effect of DP (Sierra, 2009). Clearly, further studies are needed to shed light on this persisting theoretical
dispute.
Depersonalization as a symptom in other psychiatric disorders
Clinical symptoms of DP (i.e. secondary depersonalization), occurring within the context of a primary psychiatric condition, are
exceptionally common in psychiatric inpatients presenting with a mixture of diagnoses (Hunter et al., 2004), with a study finding a
lifetime prevalence of DP experiences in 80% of their sample (n = 84), of whom 12% described them as severe and lasting (Brauer et
al., 1970). Two studies, both using the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (Sierra & Berrios, 2000), confirmed the view that secondary
DP is a frequent occurrence among psychiatric inpatients. In a study of 143 first-admission inpatients of a German clinic specialized in
psychosomatic conditions, the authors found a 1-month prevalence of depersonalization symptoms, regardless of severity, to be 62.9%,
with 33 cases (23.1%) meeting diagnostic criteria for ICD-10 depersonalization-derealization syndrome (Michal et al., 2005a). Similarly,
a recent transcultural study of psychiatric inpatients presenting with a mixture of diagnoses (n = 140) from across three countries (UK,
Spain and Colombia) reported high 1-year prevalence rates of comorbid depersonalization syndrome, ranging from 17.5% in the Colombian
sample to 41.9% in the English sample (Sierra et al., 2006a). In specific psychiatric disorders, prevalence rates of clinically significant DP vary
significantly, reported in up to 17% of psychosomatic patients (Michal et al., 2009b), 30% of war veterans with PTSD (Bremmer et al., 1998;
Davison et al., 1990; Mayou et al., 2001), and 60% of inpatients with unipolar depression (Noyes & Kletti, 1977), with one study reporting a
strong association between DP and suicidal ideation (Michal et al., 2010c). Prevalence rates of secondary DP in specific psychiatric disorders
are higher in inpatients compared to outpatient samples, supporting the view that DP represents an index of disease severity of the comorbid
condition (Mula et al., 2007). For instance, in schizophrenia, prevalence rates range from 6.9% in GP clinics (Watts, 1985), increasing to
36% in inpatient samples (Maggini et al., 2002; Noyes et al., 1977) and in the case of unipolar depression, rates vary from 4% in GP clinics


(Strickland et al., 2002) to 28% in outpatient clinics (Sedman & Reed, 1963), rising to 60% in psychiatric inpatient situations (Noyes & Kletti,
1977).
Anxiety and mood disorders
While clinical symptoms of DP can be found in practically every psychiatric condition, recent research suggests that depression and anxiety
are particularly associated with DP. For example, one epidemiological study on the German general population found clinically significant
depersonalization to be highly associated with both anxiety disorders (68%) and depression (52%) (Michal et al., 2009a). An association
between anxiety states and DP has been described since the very early clinical descriptions of this condition (Krishaber, 1872), and in
the mid-20th century the term "phobic-anxiety depersonalization syndrome" was coined in an effort to highlight the particularly strong
coexistence of symptoms of anxiety in some cases of chronic DP (Roth, 1959). More recently, this relationship has been found across the
depersonalization spectrum of severity. Within the anxiety disorders, panic disorder and social anxiety appear to be the most prevalent, and
will be the focus of the next section.
Panic attacks
Among all the psychiatric conditions, the highest prevalence rates of symptoms of DP are found during panic attacks in those suffering from
panic disorder (PD), ranging from 24.1% (Seguí et al., 2000) to 82.6% (Cox et al., 1994). Not surprisingly, symptoms of DP or derealization
are among the associated clinical symptoms defining panic disorder according to the DSM-5 (APA, 2013). Interestingly, the prevalence of
symptoms of DP during panic attacks have been found to be influenced by cultural factors, varying along a dimension known as
individualism-collectivism (Marcus & Kitayama, 1991), with significant higher prevalence rates reported in highly individualistic cultures
of the Western world (52.6%) relative to countries that are predominantly collectivistic (i.e. Asia, Africa and most Latin American countries
(25.6%) (Sierra-Siegert & David, 2007). The presence of symptoms of DP during panic attacks have been found to be associated with a history

of childhood neglect and abuse (Lachlan et al., 2001), although not consistently (e.g. Marshall et al., 2000); an earlier disease onset (e.g.
Cassano et al., 1989; Katerndahl & Talamantes, 2000); and higher prevalence of avoidance behaviour and agoraphobia (e.g. Benedetti et al.,
1997; Katerndahl, 2000; Seguí et al., 1998, 2000). The occurrence of DP during panic attacks is a marker of severity, with a higher number of
attacks and level of dysfunction and a poor prognostic sign, with some authors arguing for a possible typification of a more severe phenotype
of panic disorder with predominant depersonalization symptoms (e.g. Márquez et al., 2001; Mula et al., 2007). For example, Cassano et al.
(1989) divided 150 patients with PD into two groups based on the presence/absence of DP/DR. Symptoms of DP/DR were found in 34.7% of
cases. Clinical comparisons found the DP subgroup to be a more severe form of PD, with an earlier age of onset (25.4 vs. 30.4), more avoidance
behaviour and agoraphobia (86.6% vs. 65.3%), and a higher rate of comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders such as obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD; 11.5% vs. 2%) and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD; 61.5% vs. 29.6). More recently, the Spanish group of Seguí
and co-workers (2000) confirmed and extended these results. In a sample of 274 PD patients, 24.1% exhibited DP/DR during the attacks. In
line with Cassano and colleagues, this group was significantly younger (40.5 vs. 45.3) with an earlier age of onset (31.2 vs. 37.4). Overall, they
displayed a more severe disorder with a higher number of attacks over the past month (15.4 vs. 10.3), higher indices of anxiety and
depression, more anticipatory anxiety and agoraphobia, and greater comorbidity with simple phobia and phobic avoidance behaviour. The
authors concluded that "PD with DP during panic attacks may be distinguished as a distinct subcategory of PD" (Seguí, 2000, p. 176).
Furthermore, symptoms of DP and their perception as life-threatening during panic attacks have been found to predict the subsequent
development of agoraphobia and its rapidity of onset, respectively, providing further evidence that DP/DR during panic attacks is a poor
prognostic indicator (Katerndahl, 2000). Lastly, it is important to note that in some cases DP is still present between panic attacks and
therefore independent of them and in other cases, patients develop a full-blown DPD even after the panic attacks go into full remission. For
example, in a large cohort of 117 cases of DPD attending a specialized clinic, Simeon et al. (2003a) found that, while 30% of cases reported a
lifetime prevalence of panic disorder, only 12% presented the condition at the time of the study.

Social anxiety
The clinical association between DP and social anxiety was perhaps first acknowledged by Paul Shilder (1938) who, from a psychoanalytic
perspective, reported on the relationship between DP and social neurosis. A number of similarities in the clinical symptoms of social anxiety
and DP support the view of a strong link between these two clinical phenomena. For example, sufferers of both conditions often report
high levels of distress in social situations, which are frequently avoided or endured with the implementation of safety-seeking behaviours
(Hoyer et al., 2013; Michal et al., 2006a, 2006b; Simeon et al., 2003b). Also, self-focused attention and heightened self-observation are critical
perpetuating factors in social anxiety and depersonalization, respectively. Of interest, social phobia was found to be the most common
comorbid axis I disorder in a large series of cases with primary DPD (n = 117), with 28% presenting with the disorder at the time of the study
(Simeon et al., 2003a). Furthermore, a significant correlation has been found between measures of DP and social anxiety in both clinical and
non-clinical populations (Michal et al., 2005b, 2006b; Rufer et al., 2006). Confirming these clinical similarities, a recent study comparing
54 patients with social phobia and 34 controls, using the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale, found significantly higher rates of DP/DR
symptoms in the clinical group (92%) than in controls (52%) during a standardized social performance situation (Trier Social Stress Test),
and a close association between DP/DR symptoms and the process known to maintain social phobia, such as safety behaviours and post-
event processing. This prompted the authors to suggest a more rigorous integration of DP/DR into models of social phobia and speculate with
the possibility that high levels of DP/DR may predict poorer treatment outcomes (Hoyer et al., 2013).
Mood disorders
The prevalence of symptoms of depersonalization at any point during the course of the unipolar depression has been reported to be as high
as 60% (Noyes et al., 1977). It has been reported that as many as 50% of patients with chronic DPD report the onset of symptoms during the
course of an episode of depression (Mayer-Gross, 1935). Studies suggest that the coexistence of symptoms of depersonalization in unipolar


depression may represent an index of disease severity and a poor prognostic factor (Mula et al., 2007), associated with longer duration of the
depressive phase (e.g. Ackner et al., 1960; Nuller, 1982) and treatment resistance, including pharmacotherapy (e.g. Sedman & Reed, 1963),
electroconvulsive therapy (e.g. Gill & Lambourn, 1979; Noyes & Kletti, 1977; Nystrom, 1964) and sleep deprivation (e.g. Shelton & Loosen,
1993; Strickland et al., 2002). Symptoms of DP have also been found in association with bipolar disorder, although to a large lesser extent
relative to unipolar depression, with prevalence rates of 4% at the time of the study (Sedman & Reed, 1963). Symptoms of DP are associated
with an early onset of bipolar mood disorder, while derealization is more frequently observed in cases with comorbid panic attacks (Mula et
al., 2009), and it would appear that symptoms of DP are absent or at least rare in manic states, and when present these may represent
temporal lobe dysfunction. However, as in the case with anxiety, the exact nature of the association between DP and depression and the
mechanisms involved remain poorly understood. While the existence of strong comorbidity rates between symptoms of DP and depression
is undisputable, the prevalence of depression in cases presenting with full-blown primary DPD, in which the condition follows an
independent clinical course, is significantly lower, and when present the nature of this link remains poorly understood. In this vein, a study
comparing cases with mild or no DP with a group of patients with the severe form of the condition, meeting ICD-10 criteria for
depersonalization-derealization syndrome, found no significant difference in the prevalence of depression between the groups, suggesting a
non-specific relationship between DP and depression (Michal et al., 2006a). Furthermore, in a large cohort (n = 117) of cases with primary
DPD, as many as 67% of cases reported having suffered from major depression at some point in their lives, whereas at the time of the study
this condition was only present in 10% of cases (Simeon et al., 2003a).
General medical conditions
A strong link between the experience of DP and neurological conditions has been reported since the early 20th century when K. Haug,
a German neuropsychiatrist, described a series of cases with a range of neurological conditions who presented with clinically significant

symptoms of DP (Haug, 1936). More recently, symptoms of DP have been reported in association with an array of neurological disturbances
including the following, among others:
• Epilepsy, particularly the temporal lobe type, associated with the pre-ictal aura and some post-ictal states (Devinsky et al., 1989; Kenna
& Sedman, 1965; Roth & Harper, 1962), in which anomalous body experiences and subjective anomalies of recall appear to dominate the
clinical picture (Sierra & Berrios, 2000).
• Cerebral tumours (Lilja & Salford, 1997).
• Cerebrovascular disease (Morioka et al., 1997).
• Migraine (Baker et al., 2003; Cahill & Murphy, 2004; Shorvon et al., 1946; Simeon et al., 2003a).
• Traumatic brain injury (Blanco-Campal et al., 2003; Cantagallo et al., 1999; Grigsby & Kaye, 1993; Paulig et al., 1998).
• Vestibular disease (Jáuregui-Renaud et al., 2008; Kolev et al., 2014; Yen Pik Sang et al., 2006).
• Chronic pain (Michal et al., 2009b).
• Ménière's disease (Grigsby & Johnston, 1989).
• Multiple sclerosis (Strohle et al., 2000).
• Intermittent porphyria (Lambert et al., 2002).
• Kleine-Levin syndrome (Kas et al., 2014).
Lambert et al. (2002) provide an excellent review of published cases of organic DP, where the authors proposed the introduction of an
organic subtype of depersonalization in the DSM, analogous to "mood disorder due to a general medical condition," in order to fulfil a clinical
need and advance research in this area. Sierra (2009) also provides a very detailed review of depersonalization associated with a number of
neurological conditions including epilepsy, migraine, head injury, inner ear disease and sleep disorders.

Primary depersonalization disorder
Prevalence: population-based epidemiological studies
Population-based surveys, carried out in the UK, continental Europe and North America with validated instruments, estimate that clinically
significant DP affects 1-3% of the general population. This wide variation in prevalence rates are most likely the result of differences
between studies in parameters such as socio-demographic variables including age and cultural differences, sampling methodology,
instruments employed to assess symptoms of DP, diagnostic criteria used and the time span for which prevalence is measured. In Europe,
two early UK community surveys studying two inner London samples reported 1-month prevalence rates between 1.2% using the Present
State Examination (PSE) (n = 874) and 1.7% using the Schedule for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry (n = 759), respectively
(Bebbington et al., 1981, 1997). More recently, in the first study using the PSE on a large representative sample of the UK population (n =
3,275) derived from longitudinal data on a large birth cohort, estimated that at the age of 36 the prevalence of depersonalization disorder
in the previous month was 0.95% (Lee et al., 2012). In Germany, three independent studies, using representative samples of the general
population who were assessed during a face-to-face household survey, estimated the rates of clinically significant DP to be 1.9% over the
previous 6 months (n = 1,287), when employing the short 9-item version of Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (CDS-9: Michal et al., 2009a)
and between 0.8 (n = 5,000) and 3.4% (n = 2,512) over the previous 2 weeks when using the ultra-brief 2-item version (Michal et al., 2010b)
of this measure (CDS-2: Michal et al., 2011a, 2011b). In North America, three independent studies found prevalence rates ranging between
0.8 and 2.4%. In a random stratified sample of urban adults in Canada (n = 454), Ross et al. (1990) estimated the current prevalence rate
of clinically significant DP to be 2.4% when using the Dissociative Disorders Interview Schedule. In a representative sample from upstate
New York (n = 658), Johnson et al. (2006) used a semi-structured clinical interview derived from the 8-item Dissociative Experience Scale-
Taxon (Waller & Ross, 1997) and selected items from the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative (SCID-D; Steinberg, 1993a),

finding a 1-year prevalence of 0.8% for DP disorder and 4.4% for dissociative disorders not otherwise specified, which included significant
derealization without DP.
In addition to population-based studies, the publication of two independent large-scale studies with clinical samples of primary DPD
from both sides of Atlantic, with sample sizes ranging from 117 (Simeon et al., 2003a) (73% recruited via media advertisement, 18% self-
referred, and 9% referred by their doctor), to 199 (Baker et al., 2003) (130 recruited from clinical referrals to a depersonalization research
unit, 55 from the website and 14 from media articles) suggest that this condition, in its severe, chronic and disabling form, not attributable
to another mental of physical condition, is far from being rare and represents a psychological disorder in its own right.
In stark contrast with these findings, a study exploring the frequency with which DPD is detected in the general population found a large
gap between prevalence and clinical detection rates. Studying a large sample (n = 1.567 million) of Germans with public health insurance
found a 1-year prevalence of just 0.007% for the diagnosis of ICD-10 depersonalization-derealization syndrome, which according to the
authors demonstrates a dramatic neglect of depersonalization in clinical routine stressing the need for greater awareness of the condition
among clinicians and confirming the long-held belief that DP is severely underdiagnosed (Michal et al., 2010a).
Several factors may account for this gap between prevalence and detection (Sierra, 2009; Simeon, 2004): (1) limited familiarity on the
part of many clinicians regarding this condition and its typical presentation; (2) reluctance on the part of many patients to disclose their
symptoms because of an expectation that they will not be understood or will sound crazy; (3) patients' inability to articulate their DP
experiences; and (4) a trend to diagnose primary DPD as just a variant of depression or anxiety, even when the diagnosis of DP as the primary
condition is clearly warranted. In population-based studies, clinically significant DP affect both genders equally, with typical onset in late
adolescence and early adulthood, and it often runs a chronic and persisting course (Lee et al., 2012).
While the vast majority of epidemiological studies focuses on the prevalence of DPD in adults, empirical evidence consistently indicate
that the onset of this condition coincides with puberty and adolescence. Thus, onset of primary DPD is typically during adolescence (15-
19 years of age) with 30% of patients reporting the onset of symptoms before that age (Baker et al., 2003; Simeon et al., 2003a), and 5.6%


of patients reporting symptom onset between the ages of 4 and 10 (Baker et al., 2003). The onset of the condition after middle age is
excessively rare, with one study finding only 5% of cases with primary DPD (n = 117) reporting the onset after 40 (Simeon et al., 2003a).
Furthermore, it can also manifest during childhood, with a handful of detailed case studies of DP during this period (Eggers, 1979; Salfield,
1957, 1958) and during adolescence (Shimizu & Sakamoto, 1986). It has been suggested that the lack of linguistic skills in children may be
responsible for the under-reporting of genuine cases. Most children resort to using similes to describe the experience rather than metaphors,
more commonly used by adults. In spite of the strong evidence, surprisingly only one community survey has investigated the prevalence of
DP in adolescence. One study using a questionnaire-based representative survey of German pupils aged 12-13 estimated the prevalence of
clinically significant DP during the previous 2 weeks to be 11.9%. This led the authors to conclude that, relative to adults, adolescents are
particularly vulnerable to the condition (Michal et al., 2014a), which, from a developmental perspective, may be considered as the result of
problems with individuation or identity restructuring and self-worth regulation (Michal et al., 2006b).
Predisposing factors
There is a scarcity of research into the predisposing factors for the development of primary depersonalization disorder. Regarding personal
predisposing factors, in terms of biological factors there is no significant heritable component to DPD (Maldonado et al., 2002), with only
5% of individuals reporting DP in a first-degree relative in a US sample (Simeon et al., 2003a) and 10% in a UK sample (Baker et al., 2003).
In contrast, a family history of other psychiatric illnesses is not uncommon. For instance, Baker et al. (2003) found that 30% of patients
reported a family history of some psychiatric illness with 28% reporting depression (see also Simeon et al., 2003a). From a cognitive
theory point of view this is thought to predispose people to the development of maladaptive assumptions and core beliefs about the self
regarding vulnerability to mental illness, making transient and often benign symptoms of DP/DR more threatening since they appear to
confirm their fears of insanity. A number of psychological factors have been associated with the risk of development of DPD including harm-
avoidant temperament, immature defences (e.g. idealization /devaluation, projection and acting out resulting in denial of reality and poor


adaptation), cognitive disconnection schemata, involving defectiveness and emotional inhibition subsuming themes of abuse, neglect and
deprivation, and over-connection schemata, involving impaired autonomy with themes of dependency, vulnerability and incompetence
(APA, 2013; Simeon et al., 2002).
In terms of contextual predisposing factors, individualist cultures may confer vulnerability to DP experiences (Sierra et al., 2006a). Research
clearly indicates that adverse childhood conditions contribute to the development of primary DPD. However, while severe trauma such as
physical and sexual abuse have been found to be associated with the more severe forms of dissociative disorders, such as dissociative identity
disorder and dissociative amnesia, it is emotional maltreatment, including emotional abuse or maltreatment (e.g. emotional rejection and
punishment) and emotional deprivation (e.g. low levels of care, involvement, physical warmth and affection, nurturance, support, guidance
and appropriate socialization) that stand out as the most specific factors of vulnerability to primary DPD (Michal et al., 2006b, 2007, 2009a,
2014a; Simeon et al., 2009a, 2001b). The contribution of a history of severe childhood trauma in those presenting symptoms of DP/DR
during panic attacks remains controversial. While one study found no evidence that DP/DR symptoms during panic attacks was associated
with severe childhood trauma (e.g. sexual abuse, physical abuse, harsh punishment) (Marshall et al., 2000), a subsequent study found a link
between them (Lachlan et al., 2001). In terms of parent-child factors in early life, a study found that perceived authoritarian parenting style
to be strongly associated with experiences of DP in normal high school students (Wolfraddt et al., 2003).
Onset and precipitating factors
As previously noted, age of onset for primary DPD is typically late adolescence or early adulthood. The mean age of onset was 16 in a US study
(n = 117) (Simeon et al., 2003a) and 22.8 in a UK clinical survey (n = 204) (Baker et al., 2003). The latter study found that very early onset
(between ages 5 and 16) represented a more severe disorder with higher DP symptomatology and greater levels of anxiety and depression
(Baker et al., 2003), although Simeon et al. (2003a) failed to replicate these results. The gender distribution of DP has been controversial

with early studies showing a greater female incidence, ranging from 2:1 to 4:1 (Mayer-Gross, 1935; Roberts, 1960; Simeon et al., 1997). In
contrast, recent large studies have confirmed a 1:1 gender ratio (Baker et al., 2003; Simeon et al., 2003a).
The onset of primary DPD can be acute or insidious. With acute onset some patients give a vivid account of their first episode, providing
details of the exact moment, setting and circumstances (Simeon, 2004). In the UK study of primary DPD, 38% of patients reported a clear
precipitant to their illness, while 16% reported a gradual onset and the majority (46%) were unclear regarding the precipitating factor (Baker
et al., 2003). Simeon et al. (2003a) found relatively similar results with 49% of patients identifying a clear precipitating factor of their
illness, while 51% were unable to identify an immediate precipitant. The three most common identifiable triggers of primary DPD are severe
stress, episodes of another psychological disorder and drug use (see later). In a US sample of cases diagnosed with primary DPD (n = 117),
25% of cases reported severe lifetime stress as the precipitating factor of DP. These included prolonged severe stress associated with poor
marriages and divorces, major life transitions (e.g. moving out from home to go to college) or extremely demanding work conditions leading
to burnout. In line with these findings, in a UK population (n = 204) 15% reported onset with a "psychological" trigger, while 14% reported
onset with a "traumatic event" (Baker et al., 2003).
When the onset is insidious, the onset of symptoms of DP can be so remote that the individual fails to remember them, or it may begin
with limited episodes of lesser severity and gradually become more pronounced (Simeon, 2004). Clinical features and illness severity are
similar whether the onset is acute or insidious (Baker et al., 2003; Simeon et al., 2003a), or whether the precipitating factor is substance
misuse or a mental illness (Medford et al., 2003).
Depersonalization precipitated by drugs
Drugs have been found to be one of the three main identifiable immediate triggers of full-blown primary DPD, with a study with a large
sample of cases (n = 117) attending a specialized US clinic estimating marijuana to be the precipitating factor in up to 13% of cases, following
by hallucinogens (6%), ecstasy (2%) and ketamine (1%). While cannabis and other drugs are well known to induce transient symptoms

of depersonalization (DP) in a dose-dependent manner (Sierra, 2009), in many cases individuals go on to experience a perpetuation of
severe and often chronic symptoms after a single or limited exposure to cannabis (Baker et al., 2003; Simeon et al., 2009a). In these cases,
individuals describe the original triggering intoxication episode as a "bad trip" (Simeon et al., 2009a) and a terrifying or life-threatening
experience accompanied by a feeling of loss of control (Moran, 1986), to the point that the majority of individuals do not experiment with
the culprit drug ever again (Simeon et al., 2009a). Typically, individuals report no qualitative phenomenological differences between their
chronic symptoms of DP compared to those experienced at the time of the acute intoxication state (Szymanski, 1981). In this vein, Medford
et al. (2003) compared the clinical features of 40 drug-induced DPD cases who related the onset of symptoms to an episode of illicit drug
use (mainly cannabis use only) with 124 non-drug-induced cases, finding very similar clinical profiles. This suggests that drug-induced
DPD does not appear to represent a distinct clinical syndrome and that the neurocognitive mechanisms of the genesis and maintenance of
DPD are likely to be similar across clinical groups, regardless of precipitants. These findings were replicated in a study comparing 196 drug-
initiated DPD cases with 198 non-drug initiated counterparts, finding similar phenomenological characteristics, illness course, impairment
levels, suicidality and treatment response, supporting the existence of a uniform syndrome of DPD regardless of the nature of the precipitant
(Simeon et al., 2009a).
Course
Depersonalization can be suffered episodically or continuously, but the disorder typically runs a chronic course. Most patients describe a
continuous pattern with little or no fluctuation, and one-third suffer it episodically (Baker et al., 2003; Simeon et al., 2003a). The duration of
a single episode varies between individuals, ranging from minutes to years, and generally resolves gradually. In a large proportion of cases,
DP can first present episodically and subsequently become continuous (Simeon, 2004). Factors alleviating and exacerbating the symptoms
differ from individual to individual. Three main factors can be identified:


1. Environmental: alleviating - task focusing activities such as watching TV, social interaction, etc.; exacerbating - fluorescent lighting,
overstimulation or noise, travel to unfamiliar places, and sensory deprivation.
2. Physiological states: alleviating - sleep hygiene and rest, physical exercise, and mental discipline; exacerbating-fatigue, sleep deprivation,
viral illness, etc. With alcohol, individuals often refer to a sense of temporary relief during its consumption. In contrast, they refer to a
tenfold increase during the post consumption phase, turning a mild experience into an "absolute terror."
3. Psychological factors: alleviating – emotional stimulation; exacerbating – heightened self-observation, negative effects such as anxiety,
depression, as well as overwhelming joy. Primary DPD is often accompanied by significant distress and marked reduction in well-
being (Lambert et al., 2001a). In this regard, Baker et al. (2003) found that 79% of patients reported impaired social and/or vocational
functioning. At an interpersonal level, individuals affected often feel distressed by their intense sense of emotional detachment from
those closest to them (Simeon, 2004).
Of particular concern is the finding that patients with DPD is underdiagnosed and often misdiagnosed, with patients enduring the
condition an average of 7-12 years before receiving the correct diagnosis (Baker et al., 2003; Steinberg et al., 1993b). It is not uncommon
for many individuals to have received a previous psychiatric diagnosis. For example, Baker et al. (2003) found that 50% of their sample
reported a previous psychiatric diagnosis, including depression (62%), anxiety disorder (41%) and even schizophrenia (7%). In addition,
42% reported a previous psychiatric admission of which 57% reported more than one. This situation is illustrated in the case example
presented in this chapter. When DP commences with an episode of another psychiatric condition, symptoms of DP are often dismissed as
being secondary to the other condition – a situation that continues in spite of patients clearly reporting the persistence of symptoms of DP
even when the symptoms of the previous diagnosis have fully abated.


Psychiatric comorbidity
While the diagnosis of primary DPD requires that the symptoms do not only occur in the presence of another psychological disorder, it does
not preclude the existence of a comorbid psychiatric conditions. In fact, concomitant affective and anxiety disorders are relatively common
in individuals presenting with the severe, chronic and disabling form of DP. In their large cohort of 117 patients diagnosed with primary
DPD, Simeon et al. (2003a) found the current comorbidity prevalence rates to be highest for social phobia (28.2%), followed by dysthymia
(23.1%), generalized anxiety disorder (16.2%), panic disorder (12%) and major depression (10.3%). The authors noted that sometimes more
obvious symptoms can often mask the primary chronic disturbance of DP and that the presence of comorbid conditions did not predict the
severity of DP symptoms. Three personality disorders were disproportionately prevalent in this study: avoidant (23%), borderline (21%) and
obsessive-compulsive (21%).
Comorbidity is often secondary to DP, such as depression and hopelessness arising as a demoralized response to the suffering and
impairment imposed by unremitting DP. Likewise, DP may begin with a disturbing and frightening drug experience (i.e. a bad trip) that
results in unpleasant and unfamiliar DP symptoms generating further anxiety, leading to increased DP, thus creating a vicious circle (e.g.
Moran et al., 1986).
Cultural influences in the prevalence of depersonalization
Comparative analysis of epidemiological studies indicate that the prevalence of symptoms of DP varies substantially across cultures. For
example, while DP symptoms were reported in only 7.6% of a sample of 288 of an Indian psychiatric inpatient population (Parikh et al.,
1981), a similar study in the US found that up to 40% of 100 cases endorsed over five symptoms of DP (Noyes et al., 1977). A survey carried
out in mainland China with 304 outpatients attending a mental health centre found only a 1.6% prevalence rate of DP symptoms, and no
cases met criteria for primary DPD (Xiao et al., 2006a). In a related study, in which psychiatric 423 inpatients and 618 factory workers were

assessed using the Dissociative Disorders Interview Schedule, only one case of DPD was found in each group (Xiao et al., 2006b), representing
a significantly lower rate than those found in Western countries. It has been suggested that since DP represents an abnormality in the
perception of the self, this significant variation in prevalence rates may be, at least in part, attributable to cultural influences on how the
concept and experience of self is constructed, which would appear to be mediated by variations on the individualism-collectivism spectrum
(Triandis, 2001). Western countries are characterized by highly individualistic cultures showing higher prevalence of DP compared to
predominantly collectivistic countries found in Asia, Africa and South America. Lending support to this view, a transcultural study used
the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (Sierra & Berrios, 2000) to compare the relative frequency of comorbid DP syndrome in psychiatric
populations from the UK, Spain and Colombia finding a considerably lower prevalence rates in the Colombian sample (UK = 41.9% vs. Spain
= 35.8% vs. Colombia = 17.5%), which was irrespective of the patients' psychiatric diagnosis (Sierra et al., 2006a).
Michal et al. (2009a) found higher prevalence of clinically relevant DP in regions of western Germany relative to the eastern regions
formerly under the communist regime, which the authors attributed to higher levels of individualism in the former West Germany relative
to the former socialist East Germany. Taken together, these studies indicate that membership of an individualist culture is a risk factor for
DP, while membership of a collectivist culture may be a protective factor.
Clinical detection and diagnosis
Depersonalization is rarely the patient's presenting complaint. The experience of DP is difficult for patients to describe, and they often
fear that these experiences signify impending psychosis (i.e. "I am going mad"), even though there is not a single case reported in which
there is a clinical evolution from DPD into a psychotic disorder. Individuals with DPD often feel that their experiences are unique and
fear being labelled insane. Patients, even those well educated, are often at pains to elaborate satisfactory similes or metaphors that could
communicate their experience. Patients frequently qualify their descriptions with the "as if" prefix, which denotes (1) their intact insight

into their condition, (2) their dissatisfaction with the adequacy of these metaphors to capture and communicate their subjective experience
and (3) perhaps an attempt to prove their sanity even to themselves by acknowledging that these symptoms feel and sound obscure and
bizarre. Despite enduring an often disabling, highly unpleasant and sometimes horrifying subjective experience, patients frequently fail to
convey to the clinician the distress they experience. Patients often refer to their truly terrifying experiences as anxiety or depression in
an effort to sound less bizarre. In their endeavours to detect the condition and understand its "language," clinicians should be aware that
while the more recent empirical research has shed new light on this fascinating condition, the older clinical literature is clearly richer in
its phenomenological descriptions and still constitutes an invaluable source of information (e.g. Ackner, 1954a, 1954b; Mayer-Gross, 1935;
Shorvon et al., 1946). Also, in their pursuit of understanding depersonalization clinicians will find of great value the work of Radovic
and Radovic (2002), who present an interesting conceptual and phenomenological analysis of the language of DP. In addition, the recent
monograph authored by Jeffrey Abugel, himself a suffer of primary DPD, offers abundant insightful experiential narratives of historical and
current actual cases in which the various nuances and subtleties of this complex syndrome are depicted with extraordinary clarity and
seamlessly interwoven with robust empirical research that provides a conceptual and theoretical backdrop (Abugel, 2010).
Differential diagnosis
While DSM-5 does not include a criterion for duration of symptoms, provided that all the criteria is met, most clinicians will apply the
diagnosis when symptoms have lasted for 1 month at the very least and definitely for a 3-month duration (Simeon, 2014). A DSM-5
diagnosis of DPD can only be made "if the disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g. a drug of use,
medication) or another medical condition (e.g. seizures)" (criterion D). However, the clinician should be aware that although in many cases
acute symptoms of DP arise only during or after intoxication (e.g. Mathew et al., 1993, 1999; Melges et al., 1970; Raimo et al., 1999; Simeon et
al., 2009a), in which case their transient course precludes a diagnosis of DPD, in many cases individuals go on to experience a perpetuation of
symptoms after a single or limited exposure to a given substance (e.g. cannabis), in most cases developing a phobic aversion to the triggering


substance which they never again consume. In these cases a DSM-5 diagnosis of DPD applies (e.g. Keshavan & Lishman, 1986; Medford
et al., 2003; Moran, 1986; Szymanski, 1981). Also the diagnosis can only be made "if the disturbance is not better explained by another
mental disorder, such as schizophrenia, panic disorder, major depressive disorder, acute stress disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, or
another dissociative disorder" (criterion E). In these cases, symptoms of DP should be considered as a secondary phenomenon precluding a
primary diagnosis. Depersonalization should not be diagnosed as a primary disorder when the symptoms occur only during panic attacks
that are part of panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, specific phobia, post-traumatic stress disorder or acute stress disorder. To illustrate,
an individual may suffer from distressing symptoms of DP and/or DR while having a panic attack but these symptoms abate when the panic
episode ceases. However, clinicians should be aware that in many cases symptoms of DP initially present during panic attacks and then
persist even when the panic disorder has remitted.
In contrast to psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia, in DPD reality testing is maintained at all times. However, differentiating DPD
from delusions of DP, sometimes seen in schizophrenia, may be difficult since the disturbance in the sense of self, regarded as the central
phenomenon to schizophrenia, has a striking resemblance to DP (Sedman & Kenna, 1963). Nevertheless, it has been found that while there
is considerable overlap in many aspects of the anomalous sense of self in schizophrenia and DPD, including a diminution of the sense of
ownership or agentic control over one's thoughts, feelings, or bodily sensations, important discrepancies are also detected between these
conditions, with erosion of first-person perspective and the profound disturbances in the boundaries between the self and external objects
and persons being more distinctive of schizophrenia spectrum disorders (Sass et al., 2013). Clinicians must seek to distinguish DPD from its
delusional equivalent by the "as if" quality attached to DP symptoms in DPD.
Feeling of numbness, apathy and deadness associated with DPD may also mimic depression. However, the clinician should be aware that
feelings of numbness in individuals with DPD are associated with other manifestations of DP (e.g. a sense of detachment from one's self) and
occur even when the individual is not depressed. A remarkable feature of de-affectualization (i.e. diminution or loss of emotional reactivity)


seen in DP is that it is not usually accompanied by an objectively blunted affect in that the motor expression of emotions remains intact in
DPD.
Assessment
Clinical interview
The initial assessment should ideally be carried out by a multidisciplinary team that includes psychology and psychiatry. A full psychiatric
and general medical history and a mental state examination should be part of a thorough clinical assessment. A detailed treatment history
(i.e. pharmacological and psychotherapeutic) should also be included. A neurological examination may be sought when an underlying
organic condition is suspected (e.g. epilepsy). Clinicians may find it helpful to structure their clinical interview according to the four
principal symptom domains that make up the syndrome of DPD: (1) anomalous body experiences; (2) emotional numbing; (3) anomalies
in subjective recall; (4) and derealization. In light of the difficulties that patients often experience when trying to convey their distressing
symptoms, a rating scale embracing the phenomenological complexity of DP should be used to complement the interview with the view
to checking symptoms and tracking changes over time. The Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (Sierra & Berrios, 2000; see later) is a
comprehensive self-report measure capturing all clinical aspects of DP in a comprehensive manner and is particularly useful since it
offers "trait" and "state" versions. The clinician should ask the patient to provide daily life examples of those experiences endorsed on the
questionnaire. The initial evaluation should aim to inform a theory-driven, individualized conceptualization of the patient's presenting
experiences by way of linking predisposing, precipitating and maintaining factors as well as factors alleviating and exacerbating the
condition. From a cognitive-behavioural perspective it is critical to enquire about the patient's attribution and interpretation of the
symptoms (Baker et al., 2007; Hunter et al., 2014).


Assessment of comorbidity
Given that mood and anxiety symptoms often coexist with primary depersonalization disorder (DPD), the clinician should search for the
presence of these features, in particular anxiety, panic, depression, obsessions and compulsions. Self-report measures such as the Beck
Depression and Anxiety Inventories (BDI-II; Beck & Steer, 1996; BAI; Beck, 1990) and other disorder-specific measures may be used to this
effect. More importantly, the clinician should clarify the relationship between DP and coexisting psychological illness. The primary aim
here is to clarify whether DP has always existed exclusively in the context of these illnesses, or whether DP predated, persisted after their
resolution, or occurred independently of these. This should enable the distinction between primary and secondary DP.
Standardized measures: rating scales and structured interviews
Existing standardized measures employed to evaluate symptoms of DP can be divided into those that are non-specific, assessing DP in the
context of the evaluation of dissociative symptoms in general and those that have been purposely designed to evaluate symptoms of DP.
Non-specific measures
The most commonly used instruments to evaluate dissociative symptoms in general, including DP, are the Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D; Steinberg et al., 1990, 1993a, 1993b) and the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES; Bernstein-Carlson
& Putnam, 1986). Since these instruments were not designed to specifically evaluate DPD, relatively few items make specific reference to it,
therefore failing to capture the rich phenomenological complexity that characterizes this condition. However, since the DES is commonly
described in the literature of DP, a brief discussion of its assets and shortcomings will be presented later.
The Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES)
The DES is a widely used instrument for screening and measuring dissociation in a range of clinical and non-clinical populations (Bernstein-

Carlson & Putnam, 1986). Responses on this 28-item self-report measure of dissociative experiences are given on visual analogue scales (0-
100) to yield a quantitative index of dissociation. A second version has been developed that is easier to score in that the response scale has
a numerical format from 0 to 100 (by tens) (DES-II; Carlson & Putnam, 1993). The DES has been shown to have good reliability and validity
(Carlson & Putnam, 1993). Factor analysis revealed three dissociative dimensions: (1) amnesia for dissociative experiences (DES-Amnesia);
(2) depersonalization/derealization (DES-DP/DR); and (3) absorption and imaginative involvement (DES-Absorption). This factorial solution
was replicated in DPD (Simeon et al., 1998b).
The DES presents two shortcomings when used in DPD. First, it records lifetime frequency of dissociative experiences and so is a trait
measure. This makes it difficult to assess changes in the level of DP over time. Second, the recommended cut-off would often miss cases of
primary DPD. For example, two large-scale studies with primary DPD showed DES mean scores ranging from to 23.8 (14.9) to 24.9 (14.7)
(Baker et al., 2003; Simeon et al., 2003a). A markedly lower cut-off score of 12 has been found to yield a sensitivity of 80% and a specificity
of 95% for the detection of DPD (Simeon et al., 1998a, 2003a). When using the DES, clinicians have the alternative of using the DES-Taxon
(Waller et al., 1996), which combines eight items (3, 5, 7, 8, 12, 13, 22, 27) and has been found useful as a screen for pathological dissociation.
In this case, a cut-off score of 13 yielded 80% sensitivity and a remarkable 100% specificity (Simeon et al., 1998a).
Disorder-Specific Measures
A number of self-rating scales have been developed for the measurement of DP, offering a relatively rapid screening method to detect
the condition. However, these self-rating scales should never be considered as diagnostic tools or be viewed as alternatives to a thorough
clinical interview. Rather they may be used as tools to confirm a clinical hypothesis formulated during the clinical interview and as a way
to unearth issues to be addressed in further detail by way of clinical interview or the use of other measures. Furthermore, as Sierra and
Berrios (2000) noted, many of these measures, such as Dixon's Scale (Dixon, 1963) or the Jacobs and Bovasso DP scale (Jacobs & Bovasso,
1992), either lack construct validity or fail to embrace the phenomenological complexity of DP. Other available methods include the Fewtrell


Depersonalization Scale (Fewtrell, 2000), a self-report questionnaire; the Depersonalization Severity Scale, a clinician-rated scale developed
by Simeon et al. (2001a); and the more recently developed Structured Clinical Interview for Depersonalization-Derealization Spectrum (Mula
et al., 2008), presenting a dichotomous format resembling the characteristics of a self-rating instrument. Table 18.2 contains a list of all the
measures developed for the evaluation of DP, presenting a brief description of their psychometric properties. This section focuses on the
Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (Sierra & Berrios, 2000), and its more recently developed short forms, as it is possibly the most widely
used scale both in research and in clinical practice and was developed as a comprehensive scale to evaluate the complex phenomenology of
DP.
Table 18.2 Specific Instruments Evaluating
Depersonalization Symptoms
Scale
Author(s) (Yea
Dixon's Depersonalization Scale (DDS)
Dixon (1963)
Jacob's and Bovasso's Depersonalization
Scale (JBS)
Jacobs &
Bovasso (1992
.. The Fewtrell Depersonalization Scale (FDS)_Fewtrell (2000


The Cambridge Depersonalization Scale-Trait Version
The Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (CDS), in its original Trait Version, is a comprehensive 29-item self-rating questionnaire measuring
the severity of trait DP/DR symptoms from the onset of the condition (Sierra & Berrios, 2000). An exhaustive review of the descriptive
psychopathology of DP was a source of item selection (Sierra & Berrios, 1996, 1997, 1998). It captures the frequency and duration of DP
symptoms over the last 6 months and has been shown to be sensitive to change (Hunter et al., 2005; Sierra et al., 2005; Simeon & Knutelska,
2005). Each item is rated on two Likert scales measuring frequency (range 0-4) and duration (range 1-6), yielding a total score ranging
from 0 to 10. The total CDS score is the sum of all times (range 0-290). Initial exploratory factor analysis found four distinct symptom
dimensions: (1) anomalous body experiences; (2) emotional numbing; (3) anomalies in subjective recall; and (4) derealization (Sierra et al.,
2005). A subsequent study found a very similar factorial solution, with the only difference being that the "anomalous body experiences"
factor appeared to be split into two components: "unreality of self" and "perceptual alterations" (Simeon et al., 2008). When initially tested
on a sample of 35 patients with DSM-IV primary DPD, 22 with anxiety disorders, and 20 with temporal lobe epilepsy (Sierra & Berrios, 2000),
the CDS was able to differentiate the three clinical groups, reflecting its high discriminative validity. This is of significance in light of the high
prevalence of symptoms of DP (i.e. secondary DP) in neurological and anxiety disorders in general and PD in particular. In this study, a cut-
off score of 70 yielded a sensitivity of 75.5% and a specificity of 87.2%, showing good reliability. The CDS has been cross-culturally adapted,
translated and validated in different countries including Germany (Michal et al., 2004, 2005a), Spain (Aponte-Soto et al., 2014; Molina-
Castillo et al., 2006), Japan (Sugiura et al., 2009) and Italy (Migliorini et al., 2012).
Variants of the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale
Cambridge Depersonalization Scale-State Version The 22-item Cambridge Depersonalization Scale-State Version (CDS-S) is derived from the
CDS Trait Version and uses a visual analogue scale, from 0 to 100, to ask respondents to rate the intensity of 22 symptoms as they are
currently experienced.


Cambridge Depersonalization Scale-short versions The German group of Michal and colleagues have developed two short versions of the
original CDS containing nine and two items. These scales have good psychometric properties (Michal et al., 2004, 2005a, 2010b, 2011a).
Aetiology
The role of anxiety
The role of anxiety in the aetiology of DP has long been advocated. From a psychoanalytic standpoint, DP was thought to result
from unconscious defences that become operative after signal anxiety has been experienced and serve to protect the individual from a
breakthrough of aggressive or libidinal impulses (e.g. Levy & Wachtel, 1978). In 1959, Roth described a type of anxiety neurosis, that he
coined "phobic anxiety-depersonalization syndrome," proposing that DP was a specific vestigial brain response shaped by evolution, called
into action when fear and anxiety threaten to overwhelm the individual (Roth, 1959). Roth and Harper (1962) proposed that DP represents
an adaptive mechanism that combines opposing reaction tendencies, one serving to intensify alertness and the other to dampen potentially
disorganizing emotion, called into action under catastrophic circumstances such as bereavement or a threat to life. This view finds support
in a number of studies (e.g. Nuller, 1982; Trueman, 1984a), in particular those showing a high prevalence of transient DP in response to
extreme danger or its associated anxiety (e.g. Noyes & Kletti, 1977; Noyes et al., 1977).
Hunter et al. (2003) argued that there is substantial evidence supporting the conceptualization of DPD as an anxiety disorder. Cognitive
symptoms experienced in DPD are similar to those of increased arousal (e.g. racing thoughts, mind emptiness and subjective deficits in
concentration). Clinical features of DPD are similar to those found in anxiety disorders such as acute stress disorder or PTSD (e.g. emotional
anaesthesia, a sense of detachment or of being in a daze, and estrangement from others). In keeping with panic disorder, individuals
suffering from DPD report symptoms such as feeling dizzy or faint, or experiences of paraesthesias, and the behavioural consequence
of experiencing DPD often results in avoidance of situations that evoke greater levels of anxiety (e.g. social situations). There is a high


comorbidity of DP symptoms in anxiety disorders in general and PD in particular. Two recent models of DP embrace the view that anxiety
plays a significant role in its pathogenesis (Hunter et al., 2003; Sierra & Berrios, 1998). In spite of this, some studies suggest that anxiety and
DP are distinct psychopathological syndromes (Michal et al., 2011a, 2011b; Nestler et al., 2015; Sierra et al., 2012).
A neurobiological model
In 1998, Mauricio Sierra and German Berrios proposed a neurobiological model, referred to as the "fronto-limbic" model, endorsing the
view that DP is a "hard-wired vestigial response for dealing with extreme anxiety, by combining a state of increased alertness with a
profound inhibition of the emotional response system by the prefrontal cortex" (Sierra & Berrios, 1998, p. 903). The model, given in
Figure 18.3, proposes the existence of two distinct neural networks providing the neurobiological underpinnings for some of the cardinal
clinical features of DPD. The first involves neuroanatomical structures known to support the experiencing of emotional feelings, including
the amygdala, the anterior insula, and possibly other limbic-related structures such as the hypothalamus and the anterior cingulate.
These structures are normally regulated by the left prefrontal cortex and it is postulated that in cases of DPD a dysfunctional increase
in the regulatory suppression of the prefrontal cortex might result in the malfunctioning of these structures, leading to both dampened
sympathetic output and emotional numbing, which in turn disrupts the mechanisms responsible for bestowing perception and cognitive
functions with emotional colouring, giving rise to the related symptoms of derealization and anomalous subjective recall. Simultaneously,
an excitatory component driven by uninhibited amygdala circuits controlling both cholinergic and amino-aminergic ascending arousal
systems leads to activation of the right prefrontal cortex and a reciprocal inhibition of the anterior cingulate. This generates a state of
vigilant attention, thought to be responsible for the generation of the experiential feature of "mind emptiness" and other related cognitive
complaints (de-ideation). The second neural network involves a number of parietal regions, known to play a central role in the generation of
the experience of embodiment and feelings of agency, including the inferior parietal cortex, the temporo-parietal junction and the posterior
insula.


Left prefrontal cortex
-
Amygdala
-
Anterior cingulate
Right prefrontal cortex
+
Ascending arousal systems
+

Figure 18.3 A neurobiological model of depersonalization
Note: Adapted from Sierra & Berrios (1998). The model posits that depersonalization results from the combination of two mechanisms: an inhibitory
component mediated by a left-sided prefrontal mechanism that inhibits the amygdala (and indirectly other structures such as the anterior cingulate),
causing a reduction of emotional response and dampening of sympathetic outflow; and an excitatory component driven by uninhibited amygdala circuits
(cross-hatched area) controlling both cholinergic and amino-aminergic ascending arousal systems; this would lead to activation of the right prefrontal
cortex and a reciprocal inhibition of the anterior cingulate and generate a state of vigilant attention. The simultaneous activity of these two opposing
mechanisms explains many of the experiential features of depersonalization.
The pattern of neural response described by Sierra and Berrios's neurobiological model is considered as highly adaptive in situations of
overwhelming threat, where the individual has no control over the environment and the source of danger is unknown or unlocalized (e.g.
earthquake). It allows the inhibition of non-functional emotional responses (i.e. disorganized levels of fear) while maintaining a vigilant
alertness, allowing for simultaneous multisensory scanning. In contrast, the emergence and persistence of this response in non-threatening
situations, which patients with DPD are unable to "switch off," results in emotional numbing with associated loss of emotional tone in the
experience of the self and surroundings. These unpleasant and unfamiliar experiences are disturbing and frightening, generating further
anxiety and therefore creating a vicious circle.
Neurobiological underpinnings of the experiential feature of emotional numbing
A number of psychophysiological studies lend empirical support to the neurobiological model proposed by Sierra and Berrios (1998),
suggesting a fronto-limbic inhibitory mechanism responsible for the clinical symptom of emotional numbing. As early as 1968, Kelly and
Walter, using forearm blood flow as an index of sympathetic autonomic functioning, found that patients with DPD showed the lowest basal
recordings compared with patients with a range of psychiatric disorders and controls (Kelly & Walter, 1968). The authors concluded that the
evidence suggests that the discrepancy between subjective and objective signs of anxiety is the fundamental characteristic of patients with


depersonalization. In physiological terms, anxiety is experienced but is not translated into defence reaction arousal. In line with these
findings, Sierra et al. (2002) found that relative to normal controls and individuals with anxiety disorders, patients with chronic DPD showed
a pattern of selectively reduced autonomic response, measured by their skin conductance response (SCR) and a longer latency of response to
unpleasant pictures but not to neutral or pleasant ones, suggesting the presence of an inhibitory mechanism on emotional processing.
Moreover, patients with DPD and those with anxiety disorders showed a shorter latency of SCR to startling noise (e.g. clapping), suggesting
that they are in a heightened state of alertness as predicted by the neurobiological model of DPD. In a related study, the SCR of patients with
DPD was compared to those of patients with other anxiety symptoms and controls while they were watching pictures and video clips of
facial expressions of disgust and happiness. The authors found that in spite of the fact that both the DPD and the anxiety groups reported
similarly high levels of subjective anxiety to the disgust stimuli, the DPD showed a significantly more attenuated SCR. In other words, in spite
of acknowledging high subjective anxiety, the autonomic responses of DPD patients did not differ significantly from those of healthy
controls (Sierra et al., 2006b). The results of a number of studies using functional neuroimaging converge with those of psychophysiological
studies, serving to uncover the neuroanatomical correlates of the clinical feature of emotional numbing and lending support to the existence
of an abnormal fronto-limbic inhibitory mechanism in DPD. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), an early study compared
the emotional responses to emotionally salient stimuli (i.e. aversive or disgusted scenes) of patients with DPD, OCD and healthy controls,
finding that the DPD group showed a distinct pattern of reduced activation in limbic regions implicated in emotional processing (i.e. insula
and cingulate gyrus), combined with an increased activation in prefrontal regions (i.e. right ventral prefrontal cortex), known to be
implicated in the inhibition of emotional responses (Phillips et al., 2001a, 2001b). In line with these findings, a recent study using event-
related fMRI and simultaneous SCR in patients with DPD and healthy controls as they viewed pictures of faces with different intensities of
sadness and happiness found that, in contrast to controls, DPD patients exhibited a pattern of decreased activity in limbic structures, such
as the amygdala and hypothalamus, in response to increasingly expressive happy and sad faces. Moreover, the neural activity in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was negatively correlated with autonomic response in DPD but not in controls, suggestive of its inhibitory role


in limbic functioning (Lemche et al., 2008). Additional support for the role of a frontal inhibitory mechanism disrupting emotional
processing on the limbic system comes from a single case study using inhibitory repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to the
left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex resulting in a rapid reduction of symptoms of DP (Jiménez-Genchi, 2004). Another study showed that a
single session of right-sided, low frequency, inhibitory rTMS to the right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) in a group of patients with
DPD led to significant reductions in DP scores on the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale-State Version, lending support to the relevance of
increased VLPFC activity in the experience of emotional numbing in DPD (Jay et al., 2014).
Neurobiological underpinning of the experiential feature of anomalous body experience
Experimental neuroimaging studies suggest that a neural network of parietal regions may represent the neurobiological underpinning of
the phenomenological experience of disembodiment and loss of feelings of agency (i.e. anomalous body experience) reported by patients
with DPD. Specifically, it has been suggested that the under-activation or inhibition of the posterior insula may be implicated in the loss of
self-attribution of movement and impaired interoceptive awareness and body perception, whereas the pathology or abnormally increased
activation of the angular gyrus of the inferior right parietal cortex and the temporo-parietal junction appear to result in the loss of sense of
agency and the experience of disembodiment, respectively. In this vein, a PET study carried out in patients with DPD showed an abnormally
increased activation in the angular gyrus of the right parietal lobe, which correlated with ratings of DP intensity (Simeon et al., 2000).
A cognitive-behavioural conceptualization of depersonalization disorder
Based on the strong evidence linking DPD with other anxiety disorders and in line with other cognitive models of these disorders, such as
panic disorder (Clark, 1986, described in Chapter 15) and health anxiety (Warwick & Salkovskis, 1990, described in Chapter 19), Hunter
et al. (2003, 2014) proposed a cognitive-behavioural model of DPD where anxiety and cognitive and attribution processes play a central
role in the development and perpetuation of the condition. The model is given in Figure 18.2. Specifically, the model postulates that if a


person ascribes benign or normalizing causal attributions (e.g. "I'm just tired") to naturally occurring and often fleeting symptoms of DP,
it is likely that these will be ignored and that the phenomena will decrease in severity and eventually subside. In contrast, catastrophic
appraisals of the meaning (e.g. "There is something wrong with my brain") and consequences (e.g. "I'm going mad") of these normally
transient symptoms of DP and the generation of catastrophic attributions as to their cause may result in these symptoms becoming more
severe and distressing. In turn, this may lead to the development of a vicious cycle of emotional, behavioural and cognitive responses,
which are likely to exacerbate and in some cases perpetuate the initial symptoms, in which case they become a chronic condition (i.e. DPD).
In terms of emotional responses, these catastrophic cognitions may lead to increased anxiety and depression, serving to exacerbate the
original symptoms. Regarding behavioural responses, individuals may start avoiding certain situations (e.g. meeting new people), which
they believes may worsen their symptoms or endure the situation by engaging in safety-seeking behaviours (e.g. acting normal) which they
believe will prevent the feared outcome (e.g. "People will notice I am going mad"). Lastly, these catastrophic attributions and emotional
responses may trigger a series of dysfunctional cognitive processes such as increased hypervigilance and compulsive self-monitoring of
symptoms, which may create a vicious cycle resulting in the increased likelihood of detecting the initial symptoms and a reduced threshold
for the perception of threat.
The results of a study by Hunter et al. (2014), using a series of experimental tasks, some of them designed to induce or inhibit the
appraisals, causal attributions and attention towards DP symptoms, offer empirical support to the cognitive behavioural model of DPD. The
study found that compared to psychiatrically healthy controls and patients with other anxiety disorders (i.e. panic disorder or OCD), those
with DPD generated significantly less normalizing and more psychological causal attributions for symptoms of DP (e.g. feeling cut off from
the world), acknowledging experiencing disturbing thoughts such as "I'm losing control of my mind" or "something has gone wrong with
my brain" when worrying about their health. Moreover, the DPD group reported a perceived reduction in the severity of the condition when
their attention was focused on cognitively demanding tasks and away from symptoms of DP, whereas the other groups showed the opposite
pattern, highlighting the role of the cognitive processes of attentional bias and hypervigilance in the perpetuation of symptoms in DPD.

Based on the experiential narratives of patients with DPD, the CBT model of DPD drew attention to the idiosyncratic nature of the belief
system present in this condition. Thus, in contrast to patients with panic disorder or health anxiety, where catastrophic appraisals focus
on their physical symptoms of anxiety leading to predominant somatic causal attributions (e.g. interpreting increased heart rate as a sign
of an imminent heart attack), patients with DPD appear more troubled with the meaning and consequences of their cognitive symptoms
of anxiety (e.g. mind emptiness), exhibiting predominant psychological causal attributions, often interpreting them as a sign of madness,
neurological illness or irreversible brain damage, referred to as a form of "mental health anxiety" (Hunter et al., 2003). In support of this
claim, a study found that 12 out of 15 patients with DPD (i.e. 80%) endorsed the statement "something has gone wrong with my brain" (e.g.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) as being a likely cause of their symptoms (Baker et al., 2003), and Fewtrell (1986) drew attention to the "fear of loss
of identity" as an important catastrophic psychological causal attribution mediating the perpetuation of the condition. In spite of the ample
anecdotal evidence, a recent empirical study found only partial support for the existence of a predominant psychological casual attribution
style. Using the Revised Illness Perception Questionnaire, patients with primary DPD (n = 80) attributed their symptoms to physical - mostly
brain changes - and psychological causes in equal measure, the latter being associated with greater levels of DPD severity (Baker et al., 2007).
In line with other cognitive models of anxiety and mood disorders, the CBT model of DPD postulated that the automatic catastrophic
attributions of symptoms of DP stem from underlying assumptions or core beliefs about the self. It is hypothesized that those who go on
to suffer chronic DPD may have premorbid concerns regarding their vulnerability to mental illness, making transient DP symptoms more
threatening since they appear to confirm their fears. In support of this hypothesis, a recent survey of 204 cases with primary DPD found that
10% reported a family member with a history of DPD, and 30% reported a history of psychiatric disorder in a first-degree relative (Baker et
al., 2003).


Treatment
Depersonalization has traditionally been considered refractory to psychotherapeutic treatment. To date, there are no randomized controlled
studies of psychological interventions for DPD. With the exception of two group studies (Ackner, 1954a, 1954b; Hunter et al., 2005),
psychological treatments for DPD are limited to single case studies.
Psychotherapeutic approaches: psychoeducation
Psychoeducation has been regarded as an in invaluable tool in the treatment of DPD (Fewtrell, 1986; Torch, 1978). Fewtrell (1986) noted
that patients with chronic DPD can experience great relief when encouraged "to articulate the subjective sensations for the first time" and
suggested that sharing examples from individuals suffering similar experiences quoted in the literature may be helpful (p. 266). Moreover,
Steinberg (2001) reported that when patients have an explanation for their symptoms, which they can share with their families affected
by it, it serves to reduce their general anxiety and their overall stress level. In some cases, it may be beneficial to offer psychoeducation to
families with the view to reducing the patient's fear of being thought insane.
Behaviour modification techniques
Record keeping and contingent positive reward
Dollinger (1983) reported on a single-case study of DPD in a 15-year-old girl treated with behavioural modification techniques within the
context of family therapy. The patient was encouraged to keep a record of her episodes of DP and was subject to a reward contingency plan,
where she was allowed to drive as a reward for symptoms reduction. Following 15 weeks of treatment, DP episodes decreased from 6-10 per
day pre-treatment to none. At 3-year follow-up the patient remained symptom-free.


Flooding
Sookman and Solyom (1978) described flooding treatment both in fantasy and in vivo with two patients, a 48-year-old woman and a 40-
year-old man, reporting persistent symptoms of DP. The first patient was treated by "flooding in fantasy," using grossly exaggerated audio-
recorded narratives of DP episodes based on the patient's descriptions of their anxiety-provoking thoughts. The second patient was treated
by "flooding in vivo," involving exposure to precipitants of DP. Flooding in fantasy was found to be more effective than flooding in vivo. The
authors concluded that since DP is itself an experience of the imagination, it might be more effectively treated in imagination.
Paradoxical intention
Blue (1979) reported on the successful treatment of a 50-year-old woman with DP disorder using a programme of 7-week directive therapy.
The patient was invited to perform an undesirable task (i.e. housecleaning) whenever she depersonalized. At week 4, she reported marked
symptom-reduction. At week 5, she was invited to induce the feelings of DP within herself in order to make her feel that she was in control
of her symptoms, an intervention referred to as paradoxical intention. At 3-month follow-up the patient remained symptom-free. This
approach is similar to the "controlled dissociation" strategy described by Gil (1988), where patients are invited to deliberately increase or
decrease the intensity of their DP symptoms whenever an episode takes place in order to regain a sense of control.
Cognitive-behavioural therapy
Based on the CBT model of DPD, Hunter et al. (2003) proposed a package of interventions within a three-phase therapeutic programme
which the authors found effective in an open-label trial on 21 patients with primary DPD (Hunter et al., 2005). These authors have
recently published a self-help guide where the components of the CBT treatment for DPD and a range of complementary techniques, such
as mindfulness and problem solving, are presented in a very detailed, clear and accessible manner. Patients without access to clinical

psychology services will find this guide invaluable in their quest to effectively manage their distressing and disabling symptoms of DP, and
clinical psychologists can use the guide as an adjunct to their formal therapy (Baker et al., 2007).
Phase 1
The main objective here is the reduction of distress, increasing the levels of activity, motivation and mood. This is achieved by means of
psychoeducation, normalizing the client's experiences, and symptom monitoring. In addition, standard CBT interventions can be used in
order to treat comorbid anxiety and depression when present. Therapists should be aware that over-reliance on physiological interventions
such as applied relaxation training or Jacobsen's progressive relaxation aimed to decrease arousal (Jacobsen, 1983; Ost, 1987) may in some
cases result in a paradoxical outcome referred to as "relaxation-induced anxiety," resulting in inducing under-arousal in patients where this
represents a factor underlying feelings of unreality (e.g. Fewtrell, 1984).
Psychoeducation and normalization
In CBT, engaging patients by means of sharing an understanding of a clear rationale for their symptoms and treatment is crucial for its
effectiveness. This is even more essential in patients with DPD since on average they suffer the disorder for 7-12 years before being given a
correct diagnosis (Baker et al., 2003; Steinberg et al., 1993b). As Simeon (2004) noted, "patients can feel tremendous relief from contact with
a clinician who is able to recognize their symptoms for what they are, is familiar with the basic presenting features of the disorder and is
able to give this elusive condition a name" (p. 344). Psychoeducation involves sharing information regarding the almost universal experience
of transient symptoms of DP, particularly under situations of stress or life threat. For those with comorbid panic states, the therapist can
share information concerning the high prevalence of transient DP during panic attacks. Normalization of the experience can be gained by
describing the role of DP as a protective mechanism for dealing with overwhelming anxiety by distancing oneself from them.

Diary keeping
This exercise serves two purposes. First, it helps the patient appreciate the causal relationship that may exist between their behaviour and
thoughts and an increase in symptoms of DPD. This may facilitate the client's belief that their symptoms are controllable and not a sign of
neurological damage or impending madness. Second, it provides the patient with information regarding their low level of engagement in
pleasurable activities, which may be contributing to their low mood and increased introspection and symptom monitoring, in which case
the therapist may want to increase the levels of activity.
Phase 2
The emphasis in this phase is on effecting change in those factors thought to be perpetuating the disorder. The treatment involves specific
interventions individually tailored to target specific symptoms of DPD. This entails the reduction of avoidance of DPD provoking situations,
the use of safety behaviours, symptom monitoring and self-focused attention, and the challenging of catastrophic misattributions of DP
symptoms.
Reducing avoidance
The goal here is to reduce the use of safety behaviours (e.g. saying the right thing) and the avoidance of situations (e.g. socializing, crowded
public places, driving, etc.) that the patient perceives as anxiety-provoking due to the fear of an episode of uncontrolled DP. In this phase,
standard CBT strategies proved to be effective in the treatment of social anxiety will be helpful. (These are described in Chapter 13.)
Reducing self-focused attention
As previously noted, it has been suggested that in DPD the concept of the self and the world may become the subject of obsessive focus, which
coupled with the symptom of emotional numbing may result in the subjective distressing experience of both the self and the external world

as unreal or unfamiliar. Two types of cognitive techniques can be helpful in dealing with increased symptom-focus depending on the course
of symptoms of DP.
First, refocusing and grounding techniques can be useful strategies in individuals suffering DP intermittently, helping them to break the
cycle of increased self-focused attention and orienting them to their immediate environment. With refocusing, the individual concentrates
on a specific aspect of the environment (the colour and texture of curtains, the feel of the arms of a chair, etc.). With grounding techniques,
the individual employs a word (e.g. any word that is meaningful and grounds the person to the present), an object (stress ball, herb bag,
rubber band, etc.), a mental image (e.g. a safe and soothing place) or a self-statement (e.g. "I'm Dara, I'm real, my family is real and they are
there for me no matter what"). There is evidence suggesting the benefit of these strategies in overcoming a range of dissociative symptoms
(Kennerley, 1996).
Second, for individuals who experience DP persistently or with little fluctuation, these techniques are inadequate and the person could
potentially develop them into maladaptive safety behaviours. For these cases interventions developed to reduce self-focused attention in
social phobia (Clark & Wells, 1995), hypochondriasis (Salkovskis & Bass, 1997) and panic (Wells, 1990) are more appropriate. Two such
interventions are attention training (Wells, 1990; Wells et al., 1997) and task concentration training (TCT; Bögels et al., 1997), which
have been successfully applied in cases of panic disorder and social phobia. In attention training, patients improve their ability to control
sustaining attention, attention shifting and divided attention skills through a series of exercises. TCT consists of three phases. In phase one,
patients are encouraged to gain insight into the differences between attention that focuses on internal stimuli, external irrelevant stimuli,
and external task-related stimuli, and the proportion of time patients dedicate to each one of them. In phase two, patients receive specific
training to increase the degree of externally focused task-related attention by way of increasingly more complex exercises initially in non-
threatening situations (i.e. therapy and everyday life non-threatening situations), and in phase three, under threatening situations. This
therapeutic approach is illustrated in this chapter's case example.


Challenging catastrophic thoughts
Cognitive restructuring exercises, where negative cognitions can be reality tested and more balanced thoughts offered as replacements,
can be used in order to modify catastrophic thoughts (e.g. fear of becoming invisible). This can be achieved by two means: first, through
education, by way of discussing the probabilities that symptoms of DP/DR may result in the patient becoming invisible using a Socratic-
type dialogue; and second, through experimentation or interoceptive exposure – that is, by systematically exposing patients to their feared
sensations of DP, thereby allowing their habituation while disconfirming their feared consequences. Exposure in general, and interoceptive
exposure in particular, is regarded as the active ingredient in the treatment of a range of anxiety disorders, helping to reduce anxiety and
avoidance as well as to correct catastrophic misinterpretations of symptoms. However, this therapeutic strategy is rarely used in routine
clinical practice by non-CBT clinicians, perhaps because they view exposure as dangerous and potentially unethical. This is probably also
true in the case of the treatment of DPD. It is fair to say that one reason for the underuse of interoceptive exposure in DPD is that evoking
symptoms of DP may be challenging for many clinicians. However, clinicians should be acquainted with the range of procedures to induce
DP symptoms that have been successfully used, mainly in individuals with panic disorder or PTSD and DP symptoms. These include staring
at a dot on the wall, staring at one's own reflection in a mirror (Miller et al., 1994), electronic pulsed audio and photic stimulation with video
(i.e. goggles) and audio (i.e. earphones) input (Leonard et al., 1999), staring at a light and then attempting to read (Antony et al., 2006), the
use of 3-D glasses with the effect of hazing visual perception (McKay & Moretz, 2008), hyperventilating while standing in front of a strobe
light in a dark room and staring at a wall, and hyperventilating while staring at a moving spiral on a computer screen (Lickel et al., 2008;
Weiner & McKay, 2012).
Phase 3
This phase emphasizes maintaining progress and focusing on precipitating factors to guarantee relapse prevention. Here, the patient and

clinician review the triggers that worsen DP symptoms and work on strategies to prevent these situations. Discussion of sleep hygiene,
exercise and diet can be worthy of inclusion in this phase.
Hunter et al. (2005) reported on an open study where 21 patients with primary DPD, all attending the Depersonalisation Disorder Clinic
in London, were successfully treated with this CBT approach. The mean duration of the disorder was 14 years, 81% of the sample had a
comorbid anxiety and/or depression, and most of them were being treated with a combination of SSRI and lamotrigine, though with little
alleviation of symptoms. Following an average of 13 sessions, the authors found significant reduction of symptoms of DP, anxiety and
depression, together with improvement in general functioning, with 29% of patients no longer meeting criteria for primary DPD. More
importantly, these improvements were maintained or increased at 6-month follow-up.

Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT)
While CBT focuses on teaching patients to identify and modify their thoughts and behaviours so as to improve their feelings, ACT focuses on
acceptance, without judgement, of all private experiences including highly unpleasant thoughts and feelings. In doing so, it is expected that
patients will increase their psychological flexibility, that is, their willingness to endure a range of experiences, both pleasant and unpleasant
(Hayes et al., 1999; Hayes & Smyth, 2005). One of the main tenets of this therapeutic approach is that human suffering is part of life, and
sometimes rebelling against this fact or searching for an end to it may paradoxically perpetuate the suffering. Within ACT, DPD is considered
as an experiential avoidance where self-focus, rumination and obsession about the symptoms and the subsequent efforts to get rid of
unpleasant thoughts, emotions and sensations may be counterproductive. In DPD patients avoid situations that provoke DP as well as value-
driven activities, turning an unpleasant experience into something that is intolerable and ultimately resulting in a less rich and fulfilling life.
While there is yet no empirical support for this therapeutic approach in the treatment of DPD, in their self-help manual Nezirogly and
Donnelly (2010) describe the six core dysfunctional processes that promote discomfort in DPD, as well their functional counterparts that
would allow patients to increase their psychological flexibility and enrich their life.


1. Cognitive fusion: Individuals with DPD tend to believe that their thoughts are gospel, fusing thought with reality. An alternative is
cognitive defusion, where individuals learn to observe from their thoughts and to distance themselves from their thoughts.
2. Identifying "you" from your beliefs about yourself: Individuals with DPD tend to define themselves in terms of their DPD, by
believing, for example, "I am depersonalized." This locks them into a role and creates a sense that there is no way that they can feel or
act in opposition to this label and role. An alternative is to engage with the transcendent self or the observer self. Individuals learn to
tap into their observer self, the one that observes thoughts, feelings and experiences, helping them maintain focus on the transience of
their emotional experiences.
3. Ruminating and worry: Individuals with DPD have the habit of obsessively focusing their symptoms and what they mean (e.g. "I'm
going mad") to the detriment of what is relevant to what's going on in front of them, leading to an exacerbation of symptoms. The
alternative is mindfulness, where individuals learn to reorient their attention, becoming present to their experiences while they are
experiencing them.
4. Experimental avoidance: Individuals with DPD do a range of things to avoid or escape their unpleasant experiences. The alternative is
developing willingness and acceptance. This is the opposite of avoidance. It involves being willing to endure and accept emotional pain
in pursuit of value in life.
5. Lacking clarity in values: Individuals with DPD may lack clear values or chosen life directions. These differ from goals in that the person
can never fully attain values. The alternative is to clarify values - that is, to base one's life on more than what "feels right" such as areas
of life that can serve as direction for the life choices the person makes.
6. Narrow behavioural repertoire: Individuals with DPD may engage in few committed actions guided by chosen life directions. The
alternative is to engage in many committed actions that are in line with the person's values.


The clinician should be aware that the introduction of the concept of accepting distressing feelings to those afflicted by the profoundly
distressing and often misunderstood symptoms of DPD is likely to be met with resistance and even annoyance on the part of the patient and
that some of these strategies may initially be anxiety-provoking and exacerbate symptoms.

Mindfulness
It has been postulated that the detached state of consciousness that characterizes DP represents the polar opposite of certain aspects of
mindfulness, defined as a state of consciousness characterized by being in touch with the present moment and aware of mental and bodily
sensations, a vividness of current experience and a feeling of vitality (Allen, 2005; Brown & Ryan, 2003; Kabat-Zinn, 2005; Michal et al.,
2007). Michal et al. (2007) found a strong negative relationship between DP severity and mindfulness in a sample of chronic malignant pain
patients and healthy medical students, providing empirical support for this apparent polarity of "being detached" in the depersonalized
state versus "being in touch" in the mindful state. In contrast to this polarity, the cognitive process of attention appears to play a central role
in the conceptualization of both DPD and mindfulness. As previously noted, DPD patients often complain of a range of cognitive alterations,
in particular attention (Guralnik et al., 2000), and recent studies found empirical support for the role of attentional manipulation in
regulating DP symptoms, where harnessing attention on cognitively demanding tasks and away from DP symptoms resulted in the
diminution of symptoms (Hunter et al., 2014). On the other hand, one of the aims of mindfulness training is to enhance the person's ability
to sustain attention, which can be generated by training in paying attention in a particular way: on purpose, in the present moment and
non-judgementally (Kabat-Zinn, 2005). Patients with DPD have difficulty being immediately aware of what they are experiencing, including
their body sensations, their thoughts and the world around them (e.g. sights, smells, sounds). This is thought to be attributable to their
subjective perceptual disturbances, coupled with their relentless and obsessional focus on their distressing symptoms. Mindfulness training
may be a useful strategy to assist them to accept their discomfort and assist them to reorient their attention to the present moment non-
judgementally, and in this way reconnect with their bodily sensations, thoughts and surroundings. While there is yet no empirical support

for the effectiveness of mindfulness in the treatment of DPD, Nezirogly and Donnelly's (2010) recently published self-help manual provides
details of a range of mindfulness exercises that may help patients manage their symptoms.

Dialectical behavioural therapy strategies
Dialectical behavioural therapy (DBT) is an acceptance-oriented approach originally developed for the treatment of people with borderline
personality disorder (BPD) (Linehan, 1993). DBT for BPD is described in Chapter 27. Many people with BPD experience symptoms of DP. Both
conditions share the common theme of extreme emotional discomfort. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that the therapeutic strategies
included in DBT may also be helpful in the treatment of patients with DPD. In their self-help book, Nezirogly and Donnelly (2010) introduce
DBT strategies tailored to the suffering of DPD. These strategies are briefly described here, and in detail elsewhere (McKay et al., 2007;
Nezirogly & Donnelly, 2010).

Distress tolerance
Distress tolerance skills include distraction, self-soothing and focusing on the moment. These skills allow individuals to change their
emotional scenery when feeling particularly emotionally overwhelmed. Examples of distraction techniques include watching a favourite
movie, taking a long walk or noticing colours and sounds in the environment. Self-soothing involves engaging in activities that will be self-
calming, for example taking a relaxing bath, or that will redirect attention onto things that have deep or spiritual meaning. Mindfulness may
be used to help focus on one thing in the moment.

Emotion regulation
Emotion regulation skills help individuals resist acting according to what their unpleasant emotions urge them to do (e.g. avoiding a party
for fear of losing control and sounding mad), allowing them to tolerate the discomfort associated with not doing what DP wants them to do.


This is achieved by engaging in an action that stands opposite to their emotion. In addition, since the experience of DP is often characterized
by a distressing subjective experience of being removed from feelings or being emotionally unanchored, patients may find it helpful to
reduce this emotional confusion by learning to become mindful about their emotional experience and able to label them, thus making the
feeling more concrete.
Interpersonal effectiveness
DPD often includes a distressing emotional numbing of tender feelings about relationships, particularly with loved ones. This can be
disturbing for both people with DPD and their family or friends. Family members and friends may perceive the person with DPD as aloof or
robotic. This may lead to interpersonal conflict. With interpersonal effectiveness skills patients develop a series of assertive communication
skills which they can use when interacting with loved ones, which can help defuse conflicts, reduce the feelings of alienation and encourage
validating statements from loved ones (e.g. "I can't imagine how bewildering this must feel for you").
Pharmacological approaches
DPD has traditionally been considered refractory to most pharmacological interventions and there is still no definitive treatment or licensed
drug for the treatment of this condition (Medford et al., 2005; Sierra, 2008, 2009; Somer et al., 2013). Research in this area has been restricted
mainly to medications originally developed for the treatment of other conditions such as anxiety, depression and epilepsy (Sierra, 2008,
2009).
Serotonergic antidepressants
Early reports on the use of serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in single cases or small series of patients with DPD suggested that SSRIs
may be beneficial in the treatment DPD, particularly in cases with comorbid anxiety or obsessive-compulsive disorders (Fichtner et al., 1992;

Hollander et al., 1989; Ratliff & Kerski, 1995; Strohle et al., 2000). For example, Hollander et al. (1989) found a good response to fluoxetine
or fluvoxamine in eight patients with primary DPD and comorbid panic or obsessive-compulsive features. In addition, Simeon et al. (1998b)
found that clomipramine (Anafranil, a tricyclic antidepressant with a mode of action similar to SSRIs) had beneficial effects in seven patients
with primary DPD during an 8-week trial, although only two showed significant improvement in DP. However, more recent retrospective
treatment reviews of the effects of SSRIs in DPD showed only a modest reduction in symptom severity, failing to substantiate earlier claims
(Simeon et al., 2003a). Furthermore, a double-blind study showed that fluoxetine (10-60 mg/day) was no more effective than placebo in 54
patients with primary DPD. In keeping with earlier findings, those cases with a comorbid diagnosis of depression or anxiety showed most
benefit from this line of treatment relative to placebo. A reduction in anxiety was associated with an improvement in DP. However, those
reporting benefits clarified that DP symptoms per se had not really changed but they simply seemed "to take less notice or be less bothered
by them" (Simeon et al., 2004b). Taken together, these findings suggest that SSRIs or clomipramine in isolation are not indicated for the
treatment of DPD, although their use in those with comorbid anxiety or depression appears to improve these symptoms resulting in greater
tolerance of DP symptoms.

Lamotrigine

Lamotrigine is an anticonvulsant used to treat epilepsy. It acts at the presynaptic membrane to reduce the release of glutamate (Medford et
al., 2005). The efficacy of lamotrigine in the treatment of DPD has been investigated either in monotherapy or as adjunctive therapy with
SSRIs. An early double-blind placebo-controlled trial in nine patients with pure DPD failed to find any beneficial effects of lamotrigine when
taken as a single medication (Sierra et al., 2003). Evidence for the effectiveness of lamotrigine as an adjunctive therapy with SSRIs is more
robust. Two open-label trials found that 50 to 70% of patients with primary DPD showed a reduction in DP symptoms (Sierra, 2008; Sierra
et al., 2001). Taken together, these findings suggest that overall lamotrigine appears to be more effective as an adjunctive therapy with SSRIs
than as a single agent.


Neuroleptics
Neuroleptics have been used in non-controlled, non-blind studies, with some patients benefiting with others experiencing an exacerbation
of their symptoms (Pauw, 2000). Ambrosino (1973) found traditional antipsychotics ineffective in the treatment of DP, even though Nuller
(1982) later reported a favourable response in 9 out of 15 patients reporting DP as their primary complaint, after a 4- to 6-week trial with
clozapine, an antipsychotic with a marked anxiolytic effect (doses between 150-600 mg/day orally or intramuscularly). However, cases of
chronic depersonalization were less responsive to treatment. Warning about the potential iatrogenic effects of traditional antipsychotic
medications, Medford et al. (2005) reported that a number of patients with primary DPD, who had been previously misdiagnosed with
schizophrenia and had been started on traditional antipsychotic medications, had invariably shown a worsening of symptoms. The opening
case example in this chapter illustrates this situation.
Benzodiazepines
Anecdotal reports showed that monotherapy clonazepam or in combination with SSRIs has beneficial effects on DPD (Lambert et al., 2000;
Sachdev, 2002; Stein & Uhde, 1989). Stein and Uhde (1989) reported on the dramatic improvement of DP with clonazepam (0.75 mg) versus
carbamazepine (1,200 mg) treatment in a patient with chronic DPD. Sachdev (2002) reported the successful treatment of a 24-year-old
woman with a 3-year history of primary DPD and mild symptoms of depression with the combination of citalopram-clonazepam. Sachdev
noted that similar reports had been posted on an Internet bulletin board by a number of patients (Lambert et al., 2000). In a group study,
Nuller (1982) reported that phenazepam was successful in reducing episodes of DP in 34 of 43 patients with severe DP.
Opioid receptor agonists
In an open-label study, Bohus et al. (1999) found beneficial effects of naltrexone (25-100 mg/day) in treating dissociative symptoms in

borderline personality disorder over a 2-week period. More recently, Nuller et al. (2001) carried out a single-blind, placebo controlled trial
with Naloxone in 14 patients with chronic DP (1-16 years duration), six of them suffering DPD alone and eight presenting with comorbid
depression. Three individuals showed complete remission and seven a marked improvement (Nuller & Mickalenko, 1988). Simeon et al.
(2005) carried out an open-label trial with naltrexone on 14 subjects with primary DPD. Three patients reported marked improvement with
a more than 70% reduction in symptoms. The mean reduction in symptoms was 30% in the whole sample.

Summary
Depersonalization is a phenomenologically complex syndrome associated with the subjective sense of detachment from various aspects of
the self, such as one's body, cognitions, feelings or actions. This is often accompanied by derealization, a subjective sense of detachment from
the external world, so that it seems strange or unreal, and other people may seem unfamiliar or mechanical. Depersonalization can occur as
a primary disorder (i.e. primary DPD), or as a secondary disorder, a feature or symptom of another psychiatric or organic condition (i.e.
secondary DP). Current prevalence rates for primary DPD are about 2.4%. Yet, DP remains underdiagnosed and is often misdiagnosed. Age of
onset is typically late adolescence or early adulthood (mean age of onset 16). Large studies have confirmed a 1:1 gender ratio. No familial
pattern of inheritance has been found. Acute and insidious onsets are equally found. Most patients describe experiencing the symptoms
continuously and one-third of cases suffer episodically with episodes lasting from minutes to years. The disorder typically runs a chronic
course and is associated with marked distress and social and/or vocational impairment. Precipitating factors include substance misuse
(mainly marijuana), prolonged stress, trauma and mental illness (particularly anxiety and depression). Depersonalization disorder is often
comorbid with anxiety and mood disorders. Comorbidity with personality disorders has also been reported. There is ample evidence
supporting the role of anxiety in the aetiology and maintenance of DP, prompting a conceptualization of DP as an anxiety disorder. The role
of anxiety is central in recent neurobiological and cognitive-behavioural models of DP. Assessment should ideally be carried out by a


multidisciplinary team that includes a psychiatrist and psychologist. A full psychiatric and general medical history and a mental state
examination should be part of a thorough clinical assessment. Clinical assessment should explore symptoms in the domains of
depersonalization, derealization, desomatization and de-affectualization. A self-report measure should be added with a view to checking
symptoms and tracking changes over time. Depersonalization has traditionally been considered refractory to treatment. To date there are no
recognized psychopharmacological treatment guidelines for DPD, and at present there is no licensed drug for its treatment, although a
combination of a SSRIs and lamotrigine has shown promising results. There are no evidence-based psychological therapies for DPD.
However, a CBT open study with 21 patients found promising results. Further studies with larger sample sizes and more rigorous research
methodology are eagerly awaited.

Exercise

1. Divide into groups of three and assign roles of Sean, the psychologist and an observer. Role-play with Sean the following parts of session,
rotating roles after each role-play. The observer's role is to listen attentively and, after the role-play, to give feedback to the psychologist
on three specific and behavioural aspects of what s/he did well and at most two suggestions of things to do differently. These should
revolve around the psychologist's ability to: (1) confirm Sean's intact reality testing; (2) arrive at a differential diagnosis of schizophrenia,
depression and panic disorder; and (3) conclude that this was a case of primary depersonalization and not a case where symptoms of DP
are secondary to anxiety and depression.
a. Phase 1 where the psychologist offers Sean information regarding depersonalization in order to normalize his experience.
Remember that the language must be simple but accurate.
b. Phase 1 where the psychologist presents Sean with an individualized case formulation using a cognitive-behavioural framework.


2. After the role-plays, reflect on your experience of conveying your distressing experiences (in the case of Sean) and trying to understand
what Sean is struggling to convey (in the case of the psychologist).
Further reading for practitioners
Sierra, M. (2009). Depersonalization: A New Look at a Neglected Syndrome. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Simeon, D., & Abugel, J. (2006). Feeling Unreal: Depersonalization Disorder and the Loss of the Self. New York: Oxford University Press.
Assessment instruments
General dissociation scales
Bernstein-Carlson, E. M., & Putnam, F. W. (1986). Development, reliability, and validity of a dissociation scale. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 174, 727-735. Contains the DES.
Bremner, J. D., Krystal, J. H., Putnam, F. W., Southwick, S., Marmar, C., Charney, D. S., & Mazure, C. (1998). Measurement of dissociative
states with the Clinician-Administered Dissociative Scale (CADSS). Journal of Traumatic Stress, 11, 135-136. Available at http://
info.med.yale.edu/psych/org/ypi/trauma/cadds.txt
Carlson, E. B., & Putnam, F. W. (1993). An update on the Dissociative Experiences Scale. Dissociation, 6, 16-27. Contains the DES-II scale.
Steinberg, M., Cicchetti, D., Buchanan, J., Hall, P., & Rounsaville, B. (1993). Clinical assessment of dissociative symptoms and disorders:
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D). Dissociation, 6, 3–15.


Steinberg, M., Rounsaville, B., & Cicchetti, D. V. (1990). The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R Dissociative Disorders:
Preliminary report on a new diagnostic instrument. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 76-82.

Depersonalization-specific scales

Cox, B. J., & Swinson, R. P. (2002). Instrument to assess depersonalisation-derealisation in panic disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 15,
172-175. Contains the Depersonalization-Derealization Inventory (DDI).
Dixon, J. C. (1963). Depersonalisation phenomena in a sample population of college students. British Journal of Psychiatry, 109, 371-375.
Contains the Dixon's Depersonalization Scale.
Fewtrell, W. D. (2000). Fewtrell Depersonalisation Scale (FDS). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press.
Jacobs, J. R., & Bovasso, G. B. (1992). Toward the clarification of the construct of depersonalisation and its association with affective and
cognitive dysfunctions. Journal of Personality Assessment, 59, 352-365. Contains Jacobs and Bovasso's Depersonalization Scale.
Mula, M., Pini, S., Calugi, S., Preve, M., Masini, M., Giovannini, I., Conversano, C., … Cassano, G. B. (2008). Validity and reliability of the
structured clinical interview for depersonalization-derealization spectrum (SCI-DER). Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 4, 977-
986. Contains the SCI-DER.
Sierra, M., & Berrios, G. E. (2000). The Cambridge Depersonalisation Scale: A new instrument for the measurement of depersonalisation.
Psychiatry Research, 93, 153-164. Contains the CDS-S.
Simeon, D., Guralnik, O., & Schmeidler, J. (2001). Development of a depersonalisation severity scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 14, 341-
349. Contains the DSS.
Steinberg, M., & Schnall, M. (2001). The Stranger in the Mirror. Dissociation: The Hidden Epidemic. New York: Harper Collins. Contains the
Steinberg Depersonalization and Derealization Questionnaires.


Wing, J. K., Cooper, J. E., & Sartorius, N. (1974). Present State Examination. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. The PSE includes
items for depersonalization and derealization.
Peritraumatic depersonalization and derealization
Marmar, C. R., & Weiss, D. (1990). Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Questionnaire. Unpublished Scale, San Francisco Medical
School. Scale in on pp. 249-252 of J. D. Bremner & C. R. Marmar (Eds.). (1998). Trauma, Memory and Dissociation. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press.
Websites
Depersonalisation Research Unit, Kings College: http://www.kcl.ac.uk/ioppn/depts/ps/research/neurobiologialmechanisms/
depersonalisationresearchunit.aspx
Depersonalization Self-help.com: http://www.dpselfhelp.com/forum/. This is a depersonalization support site providing information
about depersonalization, including a forum/chatroom section.
Depersonalization.info. http://www.depersonalization.info/. This is an independent, non-profit discussion site providing information
about depersonalization disorder, and depersonalization as a symptom of other conditions.
Further reading for clients
Abugel, J. (2010). Stranger to My Self: Inside Depersonalization: The Hidden Epidemic. Virginia, US: Johns Road Publishing.


Baker, D., Hunter, E., Lawrence, E., & David, A. S. (2007). Overcoming Depersonalization and Feelings of Unreality: A Self-Help Guide Using
Cognitive Behavioural Techniques. London: Constable & Robinson.
Nezirogly, F., & Donnelly, K. (2010). Overcoming Depersonalization Disorder: A Mindfulness and Acceptance Guide to Conquering Feelings of
Numbness and Unreality. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.

References
Abugel, J. (2010). Stranger to My Self: Inside Depersonalization: The Hidden Epidemic. Carson, VA: Johns Road Publishing.
Ackner, B. (1954a). Depersonalisation I. Aetiology and phenomenology. Journal of Mental Science, 100, 838-853.
Ackner, B. (1954b). Depersonalisation II. Clinical syndromes. Journal of Mental Science, 100, 854-872.
Ackner, B., Grant, Q.A.F.R., & Maxwell, A. E. (1960). The prognostic significance of depersonalization in depressive illnesses treated with
electroconvulsive therapy. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 23, 242-246.
Aderibigbe, Y. A., Bloch, R. M., & Walker, W. R. (2001). Prevalence of depersonalisation and derealisation experiences in a rural
population. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 36, 63-69.
Adler, J., Beutel, M. E., Knebel, A., Berti, S., Unterrainer, J., & Michal, M. (2014). Altered orientation of spatial attention in
depersonalization disorder. Psychiatry Research, 216, 230-235.
Allen, J. G. (2005). Coping with Trauma. Hope Through Understanding. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Ambrosino, S. V. (1973). Phobic anxiety-depersonalisation syndrome. New York State of Medicine, 73, 419-425.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-
IV-TR). Arlington, VA: Author.


American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Amiel, H. F. (1933). Amiel's Journal (Second Edition). London: Macmillan.
Antony, M. M., Ledley, D. R., Liss, A., & Swinson, R. P. (2006). Responses to symptom induction exercises in panic disorder. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 44, 85-98.
Aponte-Soto, M. R., Vèlez-Pastrana, M., Martínez-Taboas, A., & González. (2014). Psychometric properties of the Cambridge
depersonalization scale in Puerto Rico. Journal of Trauma Dissociation, 15, 348-363.
Baker, D., Earle, M., Medford, N., Sierra, M., Towell, A., & David, A. S. (2007). Illness perceptions in depersonalisation disorder: Testing an
illness attribution model. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 14, 105-116.
Baker, D., Hunter, E., Lawrence, E., & David, A. S. (2007). Overcoming Depersonalization & Feelings of Unreality: A Self-Help Guide Using
Cognitive Behavioural Techniques. London: Constable & Robinson.
Baker, D., Hunter, E. C., Lawrence, E., Medford, N., Patel, M., Senior, C., ... David, A. S. (2003). Depersonalisation disorder: Clinical features
of 204 cases. British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 428-433.
Bebbington, P. E. (1998). Epidemiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 2-6.
Bebbington, P. E., Hurry, J., Tennant, C., Sturt, E., Wing, J. K. (1981). Epidemiology of mental disorders in Camberwell. Psychological
Medicine, 11, 561-579.
Bebbington, P. E., Marsden, L., & Brewin, C. R. (1997). The need for psychiatric treatment in the general population: The Camberwell
needs for care survey. Psychological Medicine, 27, 821-834.
Beck, A. T. (1990). Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI). San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., & Steer, R. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II). San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.

Behrmann, M., Winocour, G., & Moscovitch, M. (1992). Dissociation between mental imagery and object recognition in a brain-damaged
patient. Nature, 359, 636-637.
Benedetti, A., Perugi, G., Toni, C., Simonetti, B., Mata, B., & Cassano, G. B. (1997). Hypochondriasis and illness phobia in panic-
agoraphobic patients. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 38, 124-131.
Bernstein-Carlson, E. M., & Putnam, F. W. (1986). Development, reliability, and validity of a dissociation scale. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 174, 727-735.
Blanco-Campal, A. (2010). Depersonalization Disorder. In I. B. Weiner & W. E. Craighead (Eds.), The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology
(Fourth Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
Blanco-Campal, A., Carton, S., & Delargy, M. (2003). Organic depersonalisation unaccompanied by depersonalisation after severe
traumatic brain injury: A single case study. Brain Injury, 17, 152-153.
Bliss, E. L., Clark, L. D., & West, C. D. (1959). Studies of sleep deprivation - relationship to schizophrenia. Archives of Neurological
Psychiatry, 81, 348-359.
Blue, F. R. (1979). Use of directive therapy in the treatment of depersonalisation neurosis. Psychological Reports, 45, 904-906.
Bögels, S. M., Mulkens, S., & De Jong, P. J. (1997). Task concentration training and fear of blushing. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy,
4,251-258.
Bohus, M. J., Landwehrmeyer, G. B., Stiglmayr, C. E., Limberger, M. F., Böhme, R., & Schmahl, C. G. (1999). Naltrexone in the treatment of
dissociative symptoms in patients with borderline personality disorder: An open-label trial. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 60, 598-603.
Brauer, R., Horrow, M., & Tucker, G. (1970). Depersonalisation phenomena in psychiatric patients. British Journal of Psychiatry, 117, 509-
515.
Braun, B. G. (1997). Multiple personality disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder: Similarities and differences. In J. Wilson & B.
Raphael (Eds.), International Handbook of Traumatic Stress Syndromes (pp. 35-47). New York: Plenum Press.


Breh, D. C., & Seidler, G. H. (2007). Is peritraumatic dissociation a risk factor for PTSD? Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 8, 53-69.
Bremmer, J. D., Krystal, J. H., Putnam, F. W., Southwick, S., Marmar, C., Charney, D. S., & Mazure, C. (1998). Measurement of dissociative
states with the clinician-administered dissociative scale (CADSS). Journal of Traumatic Stress, 11, 135-136.
Brighetti, G., Bonifacci, P., Borlimi, R., Ottaviani, C. (2007). "Far from the heart far from the eye": evidence from the Capgras delusion.
Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 12, 189-197.
Brown, K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2003). The benefits of being present: Mindfulness and its role in psychological well-being. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 822-848.
Cahill, C. M., & Murphy, K. C. (2004). Migraine and depersonalisation disorder. Cephalalgia, 24, 686-687.
Cantagallo, A., Grassi, L., & Della Sala, S. (1999). Dissociative disorder after traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury, 13, 219-28.
Cardena, E., & Spiegel, D. (1993). Dissociative reactions to the San Francisco Bay Area earthquake of 1989. American Journal of Psychiatry,
150, 474-478.
Cappon, D. (1968). Fifty hours of wakefulness. Psychophysiology, 5, 97-98.
Cappon, D., & Banks, R. (1969). Orientational perception: IV. Time and length perception in depersonalized and derealized patients and
controls under positive feedback. American Journal of Psychiatry, 125, 1214-1217.
Carlson, E. B., & Putnam, F. W. (1993). An update on the dissociative experiences scale. Dissociation, 6, 16-27.
Cassano, G. B., Petracca, A., Perugi, G., Toni, C., Tundo, A., & Roth, M. (1989). Derealisation in panic attacks: A clinical evaluation on 150
patients with panic disorder/agoraphobia. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 30, 5-12.
Castillo, R. J. (1990). Depersonalisation and meditation. Psychiatry, 53, 158-168.
Clark, D. M. (1986). A cognitive model of panic. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24, 461-470.
Clark, D. M., & Wells, A. (1995). A cognitive model of social phobia. In R. G. Heimberg, D. H. Liebowitz & F. Schneier (Eds.), Social Phobia:
Diagnosis, Assessment and Treatment (pp. 69-93). New York: Guilford Press.

Cohen, R. S., & Cocores, J. (1997). Neuropsychiatric manifestations following the use of 3,4-methylenedioxymethampthetamine
(MDMA; "ecstasy"). Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 21, 727-734.
Coons, P. M. (1996). Depersonalisation and derealisation. In L. K. Michelson & W. J. Ray (Eds.), Handbook of Dissociation. Theoretical,
Empirical, and Clinical Perspectives (pp. 291-305). New York: Plenum Press.
Cox, B. J., & Swinson, R. P. (2002). Instrument to assess depersonalisation-derealisation in panic disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 15,
172-175.
Cox, B. J., Swinson, R. P., Endler, N. S., Norton, G. R. (1994). The symptoms structure of panic attacks. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 35, 349-
353.
D'Argembeau, A., Van der Linden, M. d'Acremont, M., Mayers, I. (2006). Phenomenal characteristics of autobiographical memories for
social and non-social events in social phobia. Memory, 14, 637-647.
Davidson, P.W. (1966). Depersonalization phenomena in 214 adult psychiatric in-patients. Psychiatric Quarterly, 40, 702-722.
Davison, J. R., Kudler, H. S., Saunders, W. B., & Smith, R. D. (1990). Symptoms and comorbidity patterns in World War II and Vietnam
veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 31, 162-170.
Devinsky, O., Feldmann, O., Burrowes, K., & Bromfield, E. (1989). Autoscopy phenomena with seizures. Archives of Neurology, 46, 1080-
1088.
Dittrich, A. (1975). Comparison of altered states of consciousness induced by short-term sensory deprivation and trans-
tetrahydrocannabinol. Psychophysiology, 22, 547-560.
Dixon, J. C. (1963). Depersonalisation phenomena in a sample population of college students. British Journal of Psychiatry, 109, 371-375.
Dollinger, S. (1983). A case report of dissociative neurosis (depersonalisation disorder) in an adolescent treated with family therapy and
behaviour modification. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51, 479-484.


Dugas, L. (1898). Un cas de dépersonnalisation. Introduced and translated by Sierra, M., & Berrios, G. E. (1996). History of Psychiatry, 7,
451-461.
Eggers, C. H. (1979). Depersonalization und Derealisation im Kindheit. Praxis der Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsychiatrie, 28, 231-236.
Fewtrell, W. D. (1984). Relaxation and depersonalisation. British Journal of Psychiatry, 145, 217 (letter).
Fewtrell, W. D. (1986). Depersonalisation: A description and suggested strategies. British Journal of Guidance and Counselling, 14, 263-
268.
Fewtrell, W. D. (2000). Fewtrell Depersonalisation Scale (FDS). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press.
Fichtner, C. G., Horevitz, R. P., & Braun, B. G. (1992). Fluoxetine in depersonalisation disorder (letter). American Journal of Psychiatry, 149,
1750-1751.
Finke, R. A. (1989). In: Principles of Mental Imagery. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fleiss, J. L., Gurland, B. J., & Goldberg, K. (1975). Independence of depersonalisation-derealisation. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 43, 110-111.
Freeman, A. M., & Melges, F. T. (1978). Temporal disorganization, depersonalization, and persecutory ideation in acute mental illness.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 135, 123-124.
Gardiner, J. M., & Java, R. I. (1991). Forgetting in recognition memory with and without recollective experience. Memory and Cognition,
19,617-123.
Gil, E. (1988). Treatment of Adult Survivors of Childhood Abuse. Walnut Creek, CA: Launch Press.
Gill, D., & Lambourn, J. (1979). Indications for electric convulsion therapy and its use by senior psychiatrists. British Medical Journal,
6172, 1169-1171.
Griesinger, W. (1845). Die Pathologie und Therapie der psychischen Krankheiten. Stuttgart: Krabbe.
Grigsby, J. P., & Johnston, C. L. (1989). Depersonalization, vertigo and Ménière's disease. Psychological Reports, 64, 527-534.


Grigsby, J., & Kaye, K. (1993). Incidence and correlates of depersonalisation following head trauma. Brain Injury, 7, 507-513.
Guralnik, O., Giesbrecht, T., Knutelska, M., Sirroff, B., & Simeon, D. (2007). Cognitive functioning in depersonalization disorder. The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 195, 983-988.
Guralnik, O., Schmeidler, J., & Simeon, D. (2000). Feeling unreal: Cognitive processes in Depersonalisation. American Journal of Psychiatry,
157, 103-109.
Haug, K. (1936). Die Störungen des Persönlichkeitsnewusstseins und verwandte Entfremdungserlebnisse: eine klinische und psychologische
Studie. Stuttgart: Ferdinand Enke Verlag.
Hayes, S. C., & Smyth, S. (2005). Get Out of Your Mind and into Your Life: The New Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: An experiential Approach to Behaviour Change.
New York: Guilford.
Hollander, E., Fairbanks, J., Decaria, C., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1989). Pharmacological dissection of panic and depersonalisation. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 402.
Holmes, E. A., Brown, R. J., Mansell, W., Fearon, R. P., Hunter, E. C., Frasquilho, F., & Oakley, D. A. (2005). Are there two qualitatively
distinct forms of dissociation? A review and some clinical implications. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 1-23.
Horowitz, M. J. (1964). Depersonalization in spacemen and submarines. Military Medicine, 129, 1058-1060.
Hoyer, J., Braeuer, D., Crawcour, S., & Klumbies, E. (2013). Depersonalization / derealization during acute social stress in social phobia.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 27, 178-187.
Hunter, E. C., Baker, D., Phillips, M. L., Sierra, M., & David, A. S. (2005). Cognitive-behaviour therapy for depersonalisation disorder: An
open study. Behaviour Therapy and Research, 43, 1451-1467.


Hunter, E. C., Phillips, M. L., Chalder, T., Sierra, M., & David, A. S. (2003). Depersonalisation disorder: A cognitive-behavioural
conceptualisation. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 1451-1467.
Hunter, E. C., Salkovskis, P. M., & David, A. S. (2014). Attributions, appraisals and attention for symptoms in depersonalisation disorder.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 53, 20-20.
Hunter, E. C., Sierra, M., & David, A. S. (2004). The epidemiology of depersonalisation and derealisation. Society of Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 39, 9-18.
Jacobs, J. R., & Bovasso, G. B. (1992). Toward the clarification of the construct of depersonalisation and its association with affective and
cognitive dysfunctions. Journal of Personality Assessment, 59, 352-365.
Jacobsen, E. (1983). Progressive Relaxation. Chicago, IL: University Press.
Jáuregui-Renaud, K., Sang, F.Y.P., Gresty, M. A., Green, D. A., & Bronstein, A. M. (2008). Depersonalization/derealization symptoms and
updating orientation in patients with vestibular disease. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 79, 276-283.
Jay, E-L., Sierra, M., Van den Eynde, F., Rothwell, J. C., & David, A. S. (2014). Testing a neurobiological model of depersonalisation disorder
using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Brain Stimulation, 7, 252-259.
Jiménez-Genchi, A. M. (2004). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation improves depersonalization: A case report. CNS Spectrums,
9,375-376.
Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Kasen, S., Brook, J. S. (2006). Dissociative disorders among adults in the community, impaired functioning, and
axis I and II comorbidity. Journal of Psychiatry Research, 40, 131-140.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2005). Coming to Our Senses: Healing Ourselves and the World Through Mindfulness. New York: Hyperion.
Kas, A., Lavault, S., Habert, M., & Arnulf, I. (2014). Feeling unreal: a functional imaging study in patients with Kleine-Levin syndrome.
Brain, 137, 2077-2087.
Katerndahl, D. A. (2000). Predictors of the development of phobic avoidance. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61, 18-23.


Katerndahl, D. A., & Talamantes, M. (2000). A comparison of persons with early-versus late-onset panic attacks. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 61, 422-427.
Kelly, D. H., & Walter, C. J. (1968). The relationship between clinical diagnosis and anxiety assessed by forearm blood flow and other
measurements. British Journal of Psychiatry, 114, 611-626.
Kenna, J. C., & Sedman, G. (1965). Depersonalisation in temporal lobe epilepsy and the organic psychoses. British Journal of Psychiatry,
111, 293-299.
Kennedy, R. B. (1976). Self-induced Depersonalisation Syndrome. American Journal of Psychiatry, 133, 1326-1328.
Kennerley, H. (1996). Cognitive therapy of dissociative symptoms associated with trauma. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 35, 325-
340.
Kenny, L. M., & Bryant, R. A. (2006). Keeping memories at an arm's length: Vantage point of trauma memories. Behaviour Research
Therapy, 45, 1915-1920.
Keshavan, M. S., & Lishman, W. A. (1986). Prolonged depersonalisation following cannabis abuse. British Journal of Addiction, 81, 140-
142.
Ketay, S., Hamilton, H. K., Hass, B. W., & Daphne, S. (2014). Face processing in depersonalization: An fMRI study of the unfamiliar self.
Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 222, 107-110.
Kolev, O. I., Georgieva-Zhostova, S. O., & Berthoz, A. (2014). Anxiety changes depersonalisation and derealisation symptoms in vestibular
patients. Hindawi Publishing Corporation, Behavioural Neurology, Article ID 847054.
Krishaber (1872). De la Névropathie Cérébrocardiaque. Gazette Sciéntifique Médicale. (Bordeaux).
Lachlan, A., McWilliams, M. A., Cox, B. J., & Ennis, M. W. (2001). Trauma and depersonalization during panic attacks. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 158, 656-656.


Lambert, M. V., Senior, C., Fewtrell, D., Phillips, M. L., & David, A. S. (2001a). Primary and secondary depersonalisation disorder: A
psychometric study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 63, 249-256.
Lambert, M. V., Senior, C., Phillips, M. L., Sierra, M., Hunter, E., & David, A. S. (2001b). Visual imagery and depersonalisation.
Psychopathology, 34, 259-264.
Lambert, M. V., Sierra, M., Phillips, M. L., & David, A. S. (2000). Depersonalisation in cyberspace. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
188, 764-771.
Lambert, M. V., Sierra, M., Phillips, M. L., & David, A. S. (2002). The spectrum of organic depersonalisation: A review plus four new cases.
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 1, 141-154.
Lawrence, E. J., Shaw, P., Baker, D., Patel, M., Sierra-Siegert, M., Medford, N., & David, A. S. (2007). Empathy and enduring
depersonalization: The role of self-related processes. Social Neuroscience, 2, 292-306.
Lee, W. E., Kwok, C.H.T., Hunter, E.C.M., Richards, M., & David, A. S. (2012). Prevalence and childhood antecedents of depersonalization
syndrome in a UK birth cohort. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 47, 253-261.
Lemche, E., Anilkumar, A., Giampietro, V. P., Brammer, M. J., Surguladze, S. A., Lawrence, N. S., ... Phillips, M. L. (2008). Cerebral and
autonomic responses to emotional facial expressions in depersonalisation disorder. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 193, 222-228.
Lemche, E., Brammer, M. J., David, A. S., Surguladze, S. A., Phillips, M. L., Sierra, M., ... Giampietro, V. P. (2013a). Interoceptive-reflective
regions differentiate alexithymia traits in depersonalization disorder. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 214, 66-72.
Lemche, E., Surguladze, S. A., Brammer, M. J., Phillips, M. L., Sierra, M., David, A. S., ... Giampietro, V. P. (2013b). Dissociable brain
correlates for depression, anxiety, dissociation, and somatization, in depersonalization-derealization disorder. CNS Spectrums, 9, 1-8.
Leonard, K. N., Telch, M. J., & Harrington, P. J. (1999). Dissociation in the laboratory: A comparison of strategies. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 37, 49-61.
Levy, J. S., & Wachtel, P. L. (1978). Depersonalisation: An effort at clarification. American Journal of Psychoanalysis, 38, 291-300.


Lhermitte, J. (1939). L'image de Notre Corps. Paris: Nouvelle Revue Critique.
Lickel, H., Nelson, E., Lickel, A. H., & Deacon, B. (2008). Interoceptive exposure exercises for evoking depersonalization and derealization:
A pilot study. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly, 22, 321-330.
Lilja, A., & Salford, L. G. (1997). Early mental changes in patients with astrocytomas with special reference to anxiety and epilepsy.
Psychopathology, 30, 316-323.
Linehan, M. (1993). Cognitive Behavioural Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford.
Maggini, C., Raballo, A., Salvatore, P. (2002). Depersonalization and basic symptoms in schizophrenia. Psychopathology, 35, 17-24.
Maldonado, J. R., Butler. L. S., & Spiegel, D. (2002). Treatments for dissociative disorders. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to
Treatments That Work (Second Edition, pp. 463-496). New York: Oxford University Press.
Marcus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98,
224-253.
Márquez, M., Seguí, J., García, L., Canet, J., & Ortiz, M. (2001). Is panic disorder with psychosensorial symptoms (depersonalisation-
derealisation) a more severe clinical subtype? Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 189, 332-335.
Marshall, R. D., Schneir, F. R., Lin, Sh., Simpson, H. B., Vermes, D., & Liebowitz, M. (2000). Childhood trauma and dissociative symptoms
in panic disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 451-453.
Mathew, R. J., Wilson, W., Chiu, N. Y., Turkington, T. G., Degrado, T. R., & Coleman, R. E. (1999). Regional cerebral blood flow and
depersonalisation after tetrahydrocannabinol administration. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 100, 67-75.
Mathew, R. J., Wilson, W., Humphreys, D., Lowe, J. V., & Weithe, K. E. (1993). Depersonalisation after marijuana smoking. Biological
Psychiatry, 33, 431-441.
Mayer-Gross, W. (1935). On depersonalisation. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 15, 103-126.


Mayou, R., Bryant, R., & Ehlers, A. (2001). Prediction of psychological outcomes one year after a motor vehicle accident. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 165, 391-395.
McGuire, P. K., Cope, H., & Fahy, Τ. Α. (1994). Diversity of psychopathology associated with use of 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine ('ecstasy'). British Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 391-395.
McKay, D., & Moretz, M. W. (2008). Interoceptive cue exposure for depersonalization: A case series. Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 15,
435-439.
McKay, M., Wood, J. C., & Brantley, J. (2007). The Dialectical Behaviour Therapy Skills Workbook: Practical DBT Exercises for Learning
Mindfulness, Interpersonal Effectiveness, Emotion Regulation and Distress Tolerance. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Medford, N. (2012). Emotion and the Unreal Self: Depersonalization Disorder and De-Affectualization. Emotion Review, 4, 139-144.
Medford, N., Baker, D., Hunter, E., Sierra, M., Lawrence, E., Phillips, M. L., & David, A. S. (2003). Chronic depersonalisation following illicit
drug use: A controlled analysis of 40 cases. Addiction, 98, 1731-1736.
Medford, N., Brierly, B., Brammer, M., Bullmore, E. T., David, A. S., & Phillips, M. L. (2006). Emotional memory in depersonalization
disorder: A functional MRI study. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 148, 93-102.
Medford, N., Sierra, M., Baker, D., & David, A. S. (2005). Understanding and treating depersonalisation disorder. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 11, 92-100.
Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E., & Gillepsie, H. K. (1970). Temporal disintegration and depersonalisation during marijuana
intoxication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 23, 204-210.
Michal, M., Beutel, M. E., & Grobe, G. T. (2010a). How often is the Depersonalization-Derealization Disorder (ICD-10: F48.1) diagnosed in
the outpatient health-care service? Z. Psychosomatic Medicine Psychotherapy, 56, 74-83.
Michal, M., Beutel, M. E., Jordan, J., Zimmermann, M., Wolters, S., & Heidenreich, T. (2007). Depersonalization, mindfulness, and
childhood trauma. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 195, 693-696.


Michal, M., Duven, E., Giralt, S., Dreier, M., Müller, K. W., Adler, J., ... Wölfling, K. (2014a). Prevalence and correlates of depersonalization
in students aged 12-18 years in Germany. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 9. [Epub ahead of print].
Michal, M., Glaesmer, H., Zwerenz, R., Knebel, A., Wiltink, J., Brähler, E., & Beutel, M. E. (2011a). Base rates for depersonalization
according to the 2-item version of the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (CDS-2) and its associations with depression/anxiety in the
general population. Journal of Affective Disorders, 128, 106-111.
Michal, M., Heidenreich, T., Engelbach, U., Lenz, C., Overbeck, G., Beutel, M., et al. (2006a). Depersonalization, soziale Ängste und Scham.
Psychotherapie Psychosomatik Medizinische Psychologie, 56, 383-389.
Michal, M., Kaufhold, J., Engelbach, U., et al. (2005a). Zur Validität der Skala Derealisation/Depersonalisation des Narzissmusinventars.
Psychotherapie, Psychosomatik, Medizinische Psychologie, 55, 512-516.
Michal, M., Kaufhold, J., Grabhorn, R., Krakow, K., Overbeck, G., & Heidenreich, T. (2005b). Depersonalization and social anxiety. The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 193, 629-632.
Michal, M., Kaufhold, J., Overbeck, G., & Grabhorn, R. (2006b). Narcissistic regulation of the self and interpersonal problems in
depersonalized patients. Psychopathology, 39, 192-198.
Michal, M., Reuchlein, B., Adler, J., Reiner, I., Beutel, M. E., Vögele, C., ... Schulz, A. (2014b). Striking discrepancy of anomalous body
experiences with normal interoceptive accuracy in depersonalization-derealization disorder. PLoS ONE, 9, e89823.
Michal, M., Sann, U., Niebecker, M., et al. (2004). Die Erfassung des depersonalisation-derealisation Syndroms mit der deutschen Version
der Cambridge Depersonalisation Scale (CDS). Psychotherapie, Psychosomatik, Medizinische Psychologie, 54, 367-374.
Michal, M., Wiltink, J., Subic-Wrana, C., Zwerenz, R., Tuin, I., Lichy, M., ... Beutel, M. E. (2009a). Prevalence, correlates, and predictors of
depersonalization experiences in the German general population. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 197, 499-506.
Michal, M., Wiltink, J., Till, Y., Wild, P. S., Blettner, M., & Beutel, M. E. (2011b). Distinctiveness and overlap of depersonalization with
anxiety and depression in a community sample: Results from the Gutenberg Heart Study. Psychiatry Research, 188, 264-268.


Michal, M., Wiltink, J., Till, Y., Wild, P. S., Münzel, T., Blankenberg, S., & Beutel, M. E. (2010c). Type-D personality and depersonalization
are associated with suicidal ideation in the German general population aged 35-74: Results from the Gutenberg Heart Study. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 125, 227-233.
Michal, M., Wiltink, J., Zwerenz, R., Knebel, A., Schäfer, A., Nehring, C., ... Beutel, M. E. (2009b). Depersonalization-derealization in the
psychosomatic outpatient and consultation-liaison service. Z Psychosomatik Medizinische Psychotherapie, 55, 215-228.
Michal, M., Zwerenz, R., Tschan, R., Edinger, J., Lichy, M., Knebel, A., ... Beutel, M. E. (2010b). Screening for Depersonalization-
Derealization with two items of the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale. Psychotherapy Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychology, 60, 175-
179.
Migliorini, V., Dell'Erba, A., Fagioli, F., Sierra, M., Mosticoni, S., Telesforo, L., ... Fiori-Nastro, P. (2012). Italian (cross-cultural) adaptation
and validation of the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale (CDS). Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 21, 221-226.
Miller, P. P., Brown, T. A., DiNardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1994). The experimental induction of depersonalisation and derealisation in
panic disorder and nonanxious subjects. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 511-519.
Molina-Castillo, J. J., Martínez de la Iglesia, J., Colomer, C. A., Berrios, G., Sierra, M., & Luque, R. L. (2006). Cross-cultural adaptation and
validation of the Cambridge Depersonalisation Scale. Actas Españolas de Psiquiatría, 34, 185-192.
Montagne, B., Sierra, M., Medford, N., Hunter, E., Baker, D., Kessels, R.P.C., ... David, A. S. (2007). Emotional memory and perception of
emotional faces in patients suffering from depersonalization disorder. British Journal of Psychology, 98, 517-527.
Moran, C. (1986). Depersonalisation and agoraphobia associated with marijuana use. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 59, 187-196.
Morioka, H., Nagatomo, I., Horikiri, T., Kita, K., Ueyama, K., & Takigawa, M. (1997). A case of pontine infarction with depersonalisation.
International Medical Journal, 4, 133-134.
Mula, M., Pini, S., Calugi, S., Preve, M., Masini, M., Giovannini, I., ... Cassano, G. B. (2008). Validity and reliability of the structured clinical
interview for depersonalization-derealization spectrum (SCI-DER). Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 4, 977-986.


Mula, M., Pini, S., & Cassano, G. B. (2007). The neurobiology and clinical significance of depersonalization in mood and anxiety disorders:
A critical reappraisal. Journal of Affective Disorders, 99, 91-99.
Mula, M., Pini, S., Preve, M., Masini, M., Giovannini, I., & Cassano, G. B. (2009). Clinical correlates of depersonalization symptoms in
patients with bipolar disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 115, 252-256.
Nestler, S., Jay, El., Sierra, M., & David, A. S. (2015). Symptom profiles in depersonalization and anxiety disorders: An analysis of the Beck
Anxiety Inventory. Psychopathology, 48(2), 84-90.
Nezirogly, F., & Donnelly, K. (2010). Overcoming Depersonalization Disorder: A Mindfulness & Acceptance Guide to Conquering Feelings of
Numbness and Unreality. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
Noyes, R., Hoenk, P. R., Kuperman, S., & Slymen, D. J. (1977). Depersonalisation in accident victims and psychiatric patients. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 164, 401-407.
Noyes, R., & Kletti, R. (1977). Depersonalisation in response to life-threatening danger. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 8, 375-384.
Nuller, Y. L. (1982). Depersonalisation: Symptoms, meaning, and therapy. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 66, 451-458.
Nuller, Y. L., & Mickalenko, I. N. (1988). Affective Psychoses. Leningrad: Meditsina.
Nuller, Y. L., Morozava, M. G., Kushnir, O. N., & Hamper, N. (2001). Effects of naloxone therapy on depersonalisation: A pilot study. Journal
of Psychopharmacology, 15, 93-95.
Nystrom, S. (1964). On the relation between clinical factors and efficacy of ECT in depression. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 181
(Suppl.), 1-140.
Oberndorf, C. P. (1941). Time-its relation to reality and purpose. The Psychoanalytic Review, 28, 139-155.
Office of Rare Diseases (ORD). (2007). http://raredisease.info.nih.gov/. Accessed 2009.
Ost, L. G. (1987). Applied relaxation: Description of a coping technique and review of controlled studies. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
25, 397-410.


Papageorgiou, C., Ventouras, E., Uzunoglu, N., Rabavillas, A., & Stefanis, C. (2002). Changes of P300 elicited during a working memory
test individuals with depersonalisation-derealisation experiences. Neuropsychobiology, 46, 70–75.
Parikh, A., Sheth, F., & Apte, J. (1981). Depersonalization: A phenomenological study in psychiatric patients. Journal of Postgraduate
Medicine, 27, 226-230.
Paulig, M., Bottger, S., & Prosiegel, M. (1998). Depersonalisation syndrome after acquired brain damage: Overview based on 3 case reports
and the literature and discussion of etiological models. Nervanarzt, 69, 1100-1106.
Pauw, K. W. (2000). Depersonalisation Disorder. In M. Gelder, J. López-Ibor & N. Andreasen (Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry
(Volume 1, Section 4.9, pp. 831-833). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Phillips, M. L., Medford, N., Senior, C., Bullmore, E. T., Suckling, J., Brammer, M. L., ... David, A. S. (2001a). Depersonalisation disorder:
Thinking without feeling. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging Section, 108, 145-160.
Phillips, M. L., & Sierra, M. (2003). Depersonalization disorder: A functional neuroanatomical perspective. Stress, 6, 157-165.
Phillips, M. L., Sierra, M., Hunter, E., Lambert, M. V., Medford, N., Senior, C., & David, A. S. (2001b). Service innovations: A
depersonalisation research unit progress report. Psychiatric Bulletin, 25, 105-108.
Radovic, F., & Radovic, S. (2002). Feelings of unreality: A conceptual and phenomenological analysis of the language of
depersonalization. Philosophy, Psychiatry and Psychology, 9, 271-283.
Raimo, E. B., Roemer, R. A., Moster, M., & Shan, Y. (1999). Alcohol-induced depersonalisation. Biological Psychiatry, 45, 1523-1526.
Ratliff, N. B., & Kerski, D. (1995). Depersonalisation treated with fluoxetine (letter). American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1689-1690.
Reed, G. F., & Sedman, G. (1964). Personality and depersonalization under sensory deprivation conditions. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 18,
659-660.
Roberts, W. W. (1960). Normal and abnormal depersonalisation. Journal of Mental Sciences, 106, 478-493.


Ross, C. A., Joshi, S., Currie, R. (1990). Dissociative experiences in the general population. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 1547-
1552.
Roth, M. (1959). The phobic-anxiety-depersonalisation syndrome. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 52, 587-595.
Roth, M., & Harper, M. (1962). Temporal lobe epilepsy and the phobic anxiety-depersonalisation syndrome II. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
3, 215-226.
Rufer, M., Fricke, S., Held, D., Cremer, J., & Hand, I. (2006). Dissociation and symptom dimensions of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A
replication study. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 256, 146-150.
Sachdev, P. (2002). Citalopram-Clonazepam combination for primary depersonalisation disorder: A case report. New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 36, 424-425.
Saco, R. G. (2010). The circumplex structure of depersonalization/derealization. International Journal of Psychological Studies, 2, 26-40.
Salfield, D. J. (1957). Autogenic training of a child with depersonalization. Psychotherapie, 2, 232-235.
Salfield, D. J. (1958). Depersonalization and allied conditions in childhood. Journal of Mental Science, 134, 470-472.
Salkovskis, P. M., & Bass, C. (1997). Hypochondriasis. In D. M. Clark & C. G. Fairburn (Eds.), Science and Practice of Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy (pp. 313-339). Oxford University Press.
Sass, L., Pienkos, E., Nelson, B., & Medford, N. (2013). Anomalous self-experience in depersonalization and schizophrenia: A comparative
investigation. Consciousness and Cognition, 22, 430-441.
Sedeño, L., Couto, B., Melloni, M., Canales-Johnson, A., Yoris, A., Baez, S., ... Ibanez, A. (2014). How do you fell when you can't feel your
body? Interoception, functional connectivity and emotional processing in depersonalization-derealization disorder. PLoS ONE, e98769.
Sedman, G. (1966). Depersonalisation in a group of normal subjects. British Journal of Psychiatry, 112, 907-912.
Sedman, G., & Kenna, J. C. (1963). Depersonalisation and mood changes in schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 109, 669-673.


Sedman, G., & Reed, G. F. (1963). Depersonalisation phenomena in obsessional personalities and in depression. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 109, 376-379.
Seguí, J., Márquez, M., García, L., Canet, J., Salvador-Carulla, & Ortiz, M. (2000). Depersonalisation in panic disorder: A clinical study.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 41, 172-178.
Seguí, J., Salvador-Carulla, L., Canet, J., Ortiz, M., & Farré, J. M. (1998). Semiology and subtyping of panic disorders. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 97, 272-277.
Senior, C., Hunter, E., Lambert, M. V., Medford, N. C., Sierra, M., Phillips, M. L., & David, A. S. (2001, March). Depersonalisation. The
Psychologist, 14, 128-132.
Sharot, T., Delgado, M. R., & Phelps, E. A. (2004). How emotion enhances the feeling of remembering. Nature Neurosciences, 7, 1376-1380.
Shelton, R. C., & Loosen, P. T. (1993). Sleep deprivation accelerates the response to nortriptyline. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology
and Biological Psychiatry, 17, 113-123.
Shilder, P. (1914). Selbstbewusstsein un Persönlichkeitbewusstsein: eine psychopathologische Studie. Berlin, CA: Verlag von Julius Springer.
Shilder, P. (1935). The Image and Appearance of the Human Body. London: Kegan Paul.
Shilder, P. (1938). The social neurosis. Psychoanalytic Review, 25, 1-19.
Shilony, E., & Grossman, F. K. (1993). Depersonalization as a defence mechanism in survivors of trauma. Journal of Trauma and Stress, 6,
119-1928.
Shimizu, M., & Sakamoto, S. (1986). Depersonalization in early adolescence. Japanese Journal of Psychiatry and Neurology, 40, 603-608.
Shorvon, H. J., Hill, J. D.N., Burkitt, E., & Halstead, H. (1946). The depersonalisation syndrome. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine,
39, 779-792.
Sierra, M. (2008). Depersonalization disorder: Pharmacological approaches. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, 8, 19-26.
Sierra, M. (2009). Depersonalization: A New Look at a Neglected Syndrome. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.


Sierra, M., Baker, D., Medford, N., & David, A. S. (2005). Unpacking the depersonalization syndrome: an exploratory factor analysis on the
Cambridge Depersonalization Scale. Psychological Medicine, 35, 1523-1532.
Sierra, M., & Berrios, G. E. (1996). A case of depersonalisation. History of Psychiatry, 7, 451-461.
Sierra, M., & Berrios, G. E. (1997). Depersonalisation: A conceptual history. History of Psychiatry, 8, 213-229.
Sierra, M., & Berrios, G. E. (1998). Depersonalisation: Neurobiological perspectives. Biological Psychiatry, 44, 898-908.
Sierra, M., & Berrios, G. E. (2000). The Cambridge Depersonalisation Scale: A new instrument for the measurement of depersonalisation.
Psychiatry Research, 93, 153-164.
Sierra, M., & Berrios, G. (2001). The phenomenological stability of depersonalisation: Comparing the old with the new. The Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 189, 629-636.
Sierra, M., Gomez, J., Molina, J. J., Luque, R., Muñoz, J. F., & David, A. S. (2006a). Depersonalization in psychiatric patients: a transcultural
study. Journal of Mental and Nervous Disease, 194, 356-361.
Sierra, M., Medford, N., Wyatt, G., & David, A. S. (2012). Depersonalization disorder and anxiety: A special relationship? Psychiatry
Research, 197, 123-127.
Sierra, M., Phillips, M. L., Ivin, G., Lambert, M. V., Krystal, J., & David, A. S. (2003). A placebo-controlled, cross-over trial of lamotrigine in
depersonalisation disorder. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 17, 103-107.
Sierra, M., Senior, C., Dalton, J., McDonough, M., Bond, A., Phillips, M. L., ... David, A. S. (2002). Autonomic response in depersonalisation
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 833-838.
Sierra, M., Senior, C., Phillips, M. L., & David, A. S. (2006b). Autonomic response in the perception of disgust and happiness in
depersonalization disorder. Psychiatry Research, 145, 225-231.
Sierra-Siegert, M., & David, A. S. (2007). Depersonalization and individualism: the effect of culture on symptom profiles in panic
disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 195, 989-995.


Simeon, D. (2004). Depersonalisation disorder: A contemporary overview. CNS Drugs, 18, 343-354.
Simeon, D. (2009). Depersonalization disorder. In P. F. Dell & J. A. O'Neill (Eds.), Dissociation and Dissociative Disorders DSM-V and beyond
(pp. 441-442). New York: Routledge.
Simeon, D. (2014). Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder. In G. Gabbard (Ed.), Treatments of Psychiatric Disorders (Fifth Edition, Part
5, pp. 459-469). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press.
Simeon, D., & Abugel, J. (2006). Feeling unreal: Depersonalization Disorder and the Loss of the Self. New York: Oxford University Press.
Simeon, D., Gross, S., Guralnik, O., Stein, D. J., Schmeidler, J., & Hollander, E. (1997). Feeling unreal: 30 cases of DSM-III-R
depersonalisation disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 1107-1113.
Simeon, D., Guralnik, O., Gross, S., Stein, D. J., Schmeidler, J., & Hollander, E. (1998a). The detection and measurement of
depersonalisation disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 186, 536-542.
Simeon, D., Guralnik, O., Hazlett, E. A., Spiegel-Cohen, J., Hollander, E., & Buchsbaum, M. S. (2000). Feeling unreal: A PET study of
depersonalisation disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1782-1788.
Simeon, D., Guralnik, O., Knutelska, M., & Schmeidler, J. (2002). Personality factors associated with dissociation: temperament, defences,
and cognitive schemata. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 489-491.
Simeon, D., Guralnik, O., & Schmeidler, J. (2001a). Development of a depersonalisation severity scale. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 14, 341-
349.
Simeon, D., Guralnik, O., Schmeidler, J., & Knutelska, M. (2004b). Fluoxetine therapy in depersonalisation disorder: Randomised
controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 185, 31-36.
Simeon, D., Guralnik, O., Schmeidler, J., Sirof, B., & Knutelska, M. (2001b). The role of childhood interpersonal trauma in
depersonalisation disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1027-1033.


Simeon, D., Hwu, R., & Knutelska, M. (2007). Temporal disintegration in depersonalization disorder. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 8,
11-24.
Simeon, D., & Knutelska, M. (2005). An open trial of naltrexone in the treatment of depersonalization disorder. Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 25, 267-270.
Simeon, D., Knutelska, M., Nelson, D., & Guralnik, O. (2003a). Feeling unreal: A depersonalisation disorder update of 117 cases. Journal
Clinical Psychiatry, 64, 990-997.
Simeon, D., Knutelska, M., Nelson, D., & Guralnik, O., & Schmeidler, J. (2003b). Examination of the pathological dissociation taxon in
depersonalisation disorder. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 11, 738-744.
Simeon, D., Kozin, D. S., Segal, K., & Lerch, B. (2009a). Is depersonalization disorder initiated by drug use any different? A survey of 394
adults. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 70, 1358-1364.
Simeon, D., Kozin, D. S., Segal, K., Lerch, B., Dujour, R., & Giesbrecht, T. (2008). De-constructing depersonalization: Further evidence for
symptom cluster. Psychiatry Research, 157, 303-306.
Simeon, D., Stein, D. J., & Hollander, E. (1998b). Treatment of depersonalisation disorder with clomipramine. Biological Psychiatry, 44,
302-303.
Somer, E., Amos-Williams, T., & Stein, D. J. (2013). Evidence-based treatment for Depersonalisation- derealisation Disorder (DPRD).
Biomed Central, 1, 20-32.
Sookman, D., & Solyom, L. (1978). Severe depersonalisation treated by behaviour therapy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 135, 12.
Spiegel, D., Loewenstein, R. J., Lewis-Fernández, R., Sar, V., Simeon, D., Vermetten, E., ... Dell, P. F. (2011). Dissociative disorders in DSM-5.
Depression and Anxiety, 28, 824-852.
Stein, M. B., & Uhde, T. W. (1989). Depersonalisation disorder: Effects of caffeine and response to pharmacotherapy. Biological Psychiatry,
26, 315-320.


Steinberg, M. (1993a). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders, Third Edition (SCID-D). Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Press.
Steinberg, M. (2001). Depersonalisation. In G. Gabbard (Ed.), Treatments of Psychiatric Disorders (Third Edition, Volume 2, pp. 1695-
1714). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press.
Steinberg, M., Cicchetti, D., Buchanan, J., Hall, P., & Rounsaville, B. (1993b). Clinical assessment of dissociative symptoms and disorders:
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D). Dissociation, 6, 3–15.
Steinberg, M., Rounsaville, B., & Cicchetti, D. V. (1990). The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R Dissociative Disorders:
Preliminary report on a new diagnostic instrument. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 76-82.
Steinberg, M., & Schnall, M. (2001). The Stranger in the Mirror. Dissociation: The Hidden Epidemic. HarperCollins: New York.
Stephens, G. L., & Graham, G. (2000). When Self-Consciousness Breaks: Alien Voices and Inserted Thoughts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stewart, W. A. (1974). Panel on depersonalization. Journal of the American Psychoanalytical Association, 12, 171-186.
Störring, E. (1933). Die Depersonalisation: eine psychopathologische Untersuchung. Archiv für Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten, 98,
462-545.
Strickland, P. L., Deakin, J. F.W., Percival, C., Dixon, J., Gater, R. A., & Goldberg, D. P. (2002). Bio-social origins of depression in the
community-interactions between social adversity, cortisol and serotonin neurotransmission. British Journal of Psychiatry, 180, 168-
173.
Strohle, A., Kumpfel, T., & Sonntag, A. (2000). Paroxetine for depersonalization associated with multiple sclerosis. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 157, 150.
Sugiura, M., Hirosawa, M., Tanaka, S., Nishi, Y., Yamada, Y., & Mizuno, M. (2009). Reliability and validity of a Japanese version of the
Cambridge depersonalization scale as a screening instrument for depersonalization disorder. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 63,
314-321.


Szymanski, H. V. (1981). Prolonged depersonalisation after marijuana use. American Journal of Psychiatry, 138, 231-233.
Tall, L. A., & Faber, A. W. (1997). Dissociation as a predictor of psychopathology following burn injury. Burns, 23, 400-403.
Taylor, F.K. (1982). Depersonalization in the light of Brentano's phenomenology. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 55, 297-306.
Torch, E. M. (1978). Review of the relationship between obsession and depersonalisation. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 58, 191-198.
Triandis, H. C. (2001). Individualism-collectivism and personality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 907-924.
Trueman, D. (1984a). Depersonalisation in a nonclinical population. The Journal of Psychology, 116, 107-112.
Trueman, D. (1984b). Anxiety and depersonalization and derealization experiences. Psychological Reports, 54, 91-96
Waller, N. G., Putnam, F. W., & Carlson, E. B. (1996). Types of dissociation and dissociative types: A taxometric analysis of dissociative
experiences. Psychological Methods, 1, 300-321.
Waller, N. G., & Ross, C. A. (1997). The prevalence and biometric structure of pathological dissociation in the general population:
Taxometric and behaviour genetic findings. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 499-510.
Waltzner, H. (1972). Depersonalisation and the use of LSD: A psychodynamic study. American Journal of Psychoanalysis, 32, 45-52.
Warwick, H.M.C., & Salkovskis, P. M. (1990). Hypochondriasis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 105-117.
Watts, C. A. (1985). A long-term follow-up of schizophrenia patients: 1946-1983. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 46, 210-216.
Weiner, E., & McKay, D. (2012). A preliminary evaluation of repeated exposure for depersonalization and derealization. Behaviour
Modification, 37, 226-242.
Wells, A. (1990). Panic disorder in association with relaxation induced anxiety: An attentional training approach to treatment.
Behaviour Therapy, 21, 273-380.
Wells, A. (1997). Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders: A Practice Manual and Conceptual Guide. Chichester: Wiley.
Wells, A., White, J., & Carter, K. (1997). Attention training: Effects on anxiety and beliefs in panic and social phobia. Clinical Psychology
and Psychotherapy, 4, 226-232.


Wenzel, K., Bernstein, D. P., Handelsman, L., Rinaldi, P., Rugiero, J., & Higgins, B. (1996). Levels of dissociation in detoxified substance
abusers and their relationship to chronicity of alcohol and drug abuse. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184, 220-227.
Williams, A. D., & Moulds, M. L. (2006). Cognitive avoidance of intrusive memories: Recall vantage perspective and associations with
depression. Behavioural Research and Therapy, 45, 1141-1153.
Wolfraddt, U., Hempel, S., & Miles, J.N.V. (2003). Perceived parenting styles, depersonalization, anxiety and coping behaviour in
adolescents. Personality and Individual Differences, 34, 521-532.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1993). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Xiao, Z., Yan, H., Wang, Z. et al. (2006a). Dissociative experiences in China. Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 7, 23-38.
Xiao, Z., Yan, H., Wang, Z. et al. (2006b). Trauma and dissociation in China. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 1388-1391.
Yen Pik Sang, F., Jáuregui-Renaud, K., Green, D. A., Bronstein, A. M., & Gresty, M. A. (2006). Depersonalization/derealization symptoms in
vestibular disease. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 77, 760-766.
Zeller, A. (1938). Über einige Hauptpunkte in der Erforschung und Heilung der Seelenstörunger. Zeitschrift für die Beurtheilung und
heilung der krankhafte Seelenzustände, 1, 515-569.


Section 4 Physical health problems

Chapter 19 Health anxiety and somatization

Patricia Furer and John R. Walker
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-19
Case study
Maria, a 47-year-old high school teacher, came to the clinic after reading a newspaper article describing health anxiety. For years she had
scrutinized her body constantly, afraid she would miss an early sign of cancer and suddenly find herself with advanced, untreatable cancer.
She felt overwhelmed by everyday experiences with illness or death, and when she was struggling with a specific worry, she was distracted
from her work. As a child, Maria had had many difficult experiences with illness and death. When she was 9 she had to stand by the open
coffin of an aunt who was murdered by a family member. At 15 she lost two close friends, one to cancer and the other in a car accident. Even
as a child she worried about having a serious disease and she could remember being afraid she would find blood in her urine and her stool.
Whenever she experienced a new symptom, she could concentrate on nothing else until she felt reassured it was not serious. At the same
time, she dreaded visits to the doctor and worried that the examination and tests would confirm her worst fears. One year before she came
to the clinic, her mother died of colon cancer after a long and painful illness. Maria felt almost paralyzed by her intense health worries.


This case study will be continued at later points in the chapter to illustrate general clinical and theoretical issues concerning health
anxiety.
Clinical features
Many people experience anxiety concerning their own health or the health of loved ones. The anxiety and worry are often triggered by
bothersome physical symptoms or by experiences such as finding a breast lump or feeling a skipped heartbeat. They may also be triggered
by stories about health in the community or the media, or by coping with an illness in a loved one. Health anxiety may be quite mild and
transient, or it may be severe and chronic. Often the anxiety level fluctuates. Some individuals fear one specific illness or body symptom,
and others fear many. Conviction that one actually has a serious disease may be a part of the picture and both fear of illness and disease
conviction range along a continuum of severity. Health anxiety is often associated with excessive focus on bodily symptoms, checking for
symptoms and signs related to health concerns, frequent efforts to obtain reassurance, high levels of worry, avoidance of illness-related
activities and situations, and fear of death. These individuals may have histories of frequent health service utilization, or they may avoid
health care professionals because they fear being diagnosed with a serious disease or because they are dissatisfied with previous health care
experiences.
Health anxiety is a central feature of the newly defined categories of somatic symptom disorder and illness anxiety disorder in DSM-5
(APA, 2013), which are given in Table 19.1, and the traditional ICD-10 (WHO, 1993) diagnostic categories of hypochondriacal disorder
and somatization disorder, which are given in Table 19.2. Health anxiety is often seen in other clinical conditions, including anxiety and
depressive disorders.
Table 19.1 DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for somatic symptom disorder and illness anxiety disorder


A. One or more somatic symptoms that are distressing
or result in significant disruption of daily life.
B. Excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviours related to
the somatic symptoms or associated health concerns
as manifested by at least one of the following:
1. Disproportionate and persistent thoughts about
the seriousness of one's symptoms.
2. Persistently high level of anxiety about health or
symptoms.
3. Excessive time and energy devoted to these
symptoms or health concerns.
C. Although any one somatic symptom may not
be continuously present, the state of being
symptomatic is persistent (typically more than 6
months). (See DSM-5 p. 311 for specifiers.)
A. Preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness.
B. Somatic symptoms are not present, or if present, are only mild in
intensity. If another medical condition is present or there is high
risk for developing a medical condition (e.g., strong family history is
present), the preoccupation is clearly excessive or disproportionate.
C. There is a high level of anxiety about health, and the individual is
easily alarmed about personal health status.
D. The individual performs excessive health-related behaviours (e.g.,
repeatedly checks his or her body for signs of illness) or exhibits
maladaptive avoidance (e.g., avoids doctors for appointments and
hospitals).
E. Illness preoccupation has been present for at least 6 months, but the
specific illness that is feared may change over that period of time.
F. The illness-related preoccupation is not better explained by another
mental disorder, such as somatic symptom disorder, panic disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, obsessive-
compulsive disorder, or delusional disorder, somatic type. (See DSM-5
p. 315 for specifiers.)


Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
Classification
While the classification systems for psychological disorders are categorical, there is strong evidence that the experiences which are
summarized in diagnoses are dimensional rather than taxonic or categorical. This has been found to be the case with health anxiety (Longley
et al., 2010). It is important to remember that persons who do not meet the criteria for one of the disorders described here may still
experience considerable distress and impairment related to health anxiety and somatization and may benefit from the treatment approach
described in this chapter.
The most widely used classification systems for mental health disorders have been the DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) and the ICD-10. With the
publication of the DSM-5 there has been a major revision to develop the section on somatic symptom and related disorders, which replaces
the DSM-IV-TR somatoform disorders section. DSM-5 and ICD-10 diagnostic criteria for the principal disorders related to health anxiety are
presented in Tables 19.1 and 19.2.
Table 19.2 ICD-10 diagnostic criteria for hypochondriacal disorder and somatization disorder
ICD-10 Hypochondriacal disorder
A. Either 1 or 2:
ICD-10 Somatization disorder
A. A history of at least two years complaints of multiple and
variable physical symptoms that cannot be explained by any

1. A persistent belief, of at least six months duration, in the
presence of a maximum of two serious physical diseases
(of which at least one must be specifically named by the
patient).
2. A persistent preoccupation with a presumed deformity or
disfigurement (body dysmorphic disorder).
B. Preoccupation with the belief and the symptoms causes
persistent distress or interference with personal functioning
in daily living, and leads the patient to seek medical treatment
or investigations (or equivalent help from local healers).
C. Persistent refusal to accept medical advice that there is
no adequate physical cause for the symptoms or physical
abnormality, except for short periods of up to a few weeks at a
time immediately after or during medical investigations.
D. Most commonly used exclusion criteria: not occurring only
during any of the schizophrenic and related disorders or any
of the mood disorders.
detectable physical disorders. (Any physical disorders that
are known to be present do not explain the severity, extent,
variety and persistence of the physical complaints, or the
associated social disability). If some symptoms clearly due to
autonomic arousal are present, they are not a major feature
of the disorder, in that they are not particularly persistent or
distressing.
B. Preoccupation with the symptoms causes persistent distress
and leads the patient to seek repeated (three or more)
consultations or sets of investigations with either primary
care or specialist doctors. In the absence of medical services
within either the financial or physical reach of the patient,
persistent self-medication or multiple consultations with
local healers must be present.
C. Persistent refusal to accept medical advice that there is no
adequate physical cause for the physical symptoms, except
for short periods of up to a few weeks at a time during or
immediately after medical investigations.


D. A total of six or more symptoms from the following list,
with symptoms occurring in at least two separate groups:
Gastrointestinal symptoms
1. abdominal pain;
2. nausea;
3. feeling bloated or full of gas;
4. bad taste in mouth, or excessively coated tongue;
5. complaints of vomiting or regurgitation of food;
6. complaints of frequent and loose bowel motions or
discharge of fluids from anus;
Cardiovascular symptoms
1. 7. breathlessness without exertion;
2. 8. chest pains;
Genito-urinary symptoms
1. 9. dysuria or complaints of frequency of micturition;
2. 10. unpleasant sensations in or around the genitals;
3. 11. complaints of unusual or copious vaginal discharge;
Skin and pain symptoms
1. 12. complaints of blotchiness or discolouration of the
skin;

Note: Adapted from ICD-10 research criteria (WHO, 1993).
2. 13. pain in the limbs, extremities or joints;
3. 14. unpleasant numbness or tingling sensations.
E. Most commonly used exclusion criteria: not occurring only
during any of the schizophrenic or related disorders, any of
the mood disorders, or panic disorder.
DSM-5 suggests that most of the persons diagnosed with DSM-IV-TR hypochondriasis would now be considered for diagnoses of somatic
symptom disorder (perhaps 75% of this group) or for illness anxiety disorder (perhaps 25% of this group) (APA, 2013). A major distinction
between these two diagnoses is the emphasis on somatic symptoms. The presence of somatic symptoms and psychological reactions to
these symptoms (often including anxiety) is a key factor in somatic symptom disorder. There is now less emphasis on the lack of medical
explanation for these symptoms. In illness anxiety disorder, on the other hand, anxiety is prominent while somatic symptoms may be
absent or should be mild in intensity at most. We see this change as a favourable development because the term hypochondriasis was seen
as pejorative and demeaning by many patients. Also, the DSM-IV-TR criteria for somatization disorder and hypochondriasis were restrictive,
and many people with clinically significant levels of health anxiety and somatic symptoms did not meet the criteria for either disorder
(Bleichhardt & Hiller, 2007; Gureje et al., 1997).
In ICD-10, problems involving health anxiety are generally classified as either hypochondriacal or somatization disorder, under the
general classification of somatoform disorders (see the detailed descriptions in Table 19.2). The common features of all the somatoform
disorders are: (1) repeated presentation of physical symptoms together with persistent requests for medical investigations, in spite of

repeated negative findings and reassurance by doctors that the symptoms have no physical basis; and (2) any diagnosed physical disorders
are inadequate to explain the nature and extent of the symptoms or the distress and preoccupation of the individual (WHO, 1993). The
ICD-10 criteria for somatization disorder require the presence of (1) at least 2 years of multiple and variable physical symptoms for which
no adequate physical explanation has been found; and (2) six or more symptoms from at least two body systems. ICD-10 also allows for
the diagnosis of undifferentiated somatoform disorder in cases where the full criteria for somatization disorder are not met. The main
features of hypochondriacal disorder described in ICD-10 are: (1) persistent belief that one has one or two serious physical illnesses; or (2)
a persistent preoccupation with a presumed deformity or disfigurement (body dysmorphic disorder). In each case the preoccupation leads
to significant distress or interference with personal functioning. Normal or commonplace sensations and appearance are often interpreted
as abnormal and distressing. A notable difference between these two diagnostic systems is the inclusion of body dysmorphic disorder (not
the focus of this chapter) in ICD-10 hypochondriacal disorder. This is considered to be a separate diagnosis in DSM-5. The different views of
health anxiety and somatization in the two major diagnostic systems may result in difficulty comparing results in studies using the different
criteria. There may be significant changes in labelling, description and diagnostic criteria in the upcoming ICD-11, which may parallel some
of the changes reflected in DSM-5 (Stein, 2012).
What's in a term?
It has been a challenge to find terms acceptable to both clinicians and clients for the phenomena observed in the somatoform disorders
in general and the previous diagnosis of hypochondriasis in particular. Berrios (2001) reviewed the history of the term hypochondriasis.
Use of the term hypochondriac, in the sense we use it now, began in the 1600s. As Berrios notes, the name had negative connotations
even then. Certainly clients today do not like being labelled a "hypochondriac"; this description implies to them that "the symptoms are
all in your head." While a client may jokingly acknowledge that family members tell him he is a hypochondriac, he would prefer that this
label not appear in consultation reports concerning his treatment. A number of alternative terms have been considered for problems with


hypochondriasis. In our clinic, instead of hypochondriasis, we use intense illness worry and health anxiety, and these terms seem to be well
accepted by clients.
Terms used for problems with somatization include medically unexplained physical symptoms (MUS; Melville, 1987) and functional somatic
symptoms (Kellner, 1987). One can imagine the challenges of informing a client she has "medically unexplained symptoms" or that perhaps
she has a psychiatric diagnosis such as undifferentiated somatoform disorder. She is likely to respond with frustration and disappointment
and perhaps by continuing to seek medical opinions. Diagnostic terms in the revised DSM-5 system may be more comfortably accepted by
patients.
Epidemiology
Hypochondriasis and other somatoform disorders have not usually been included in large-scale epidemiological studies of psychological
disorders in the community. However, research in the area of health anxiety is slowly developing, and there are now a few interesting studies
examining the frequency of these problems in a variety of populations.
In one study focused specifically on somatoform disorders, Faravelli et al. (1997) conducted a structured interview with 673 randomly
selected residents in Florence, Italy. They found 1-year prevalence rates of 4.5% for hypochondriasis, 0.7% for somatoform disorder, 13.8%
for undifferentiated somatoform disorder, 0.6% for somatoform pain disorder, and 0.3% for conversion disorder. This study was unique in
that the clinical interviewers were physicians with extensive access to health information on the participants.
A national survey in Germany (Jacobi et al., 2004) described the rates of mental disorders among adults 18-65 years of age. The Composite
International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI; WHO, 1991) included an assessment of the 12-month prevalence of selected DSM-IV somatoform
disorders, including abridged somatization (4.3%), somatoform pain disorder (8.1%) and any somatoform disorder (11%). Somatoform
disorders were twice as common among women. Somatoform, anxiety and substance disorders had an early age of onset: half of current


cases had onset by age 20. Poor health status (presence of physical illness) was strongly associated with all mental disorders. This study had
the advantage of clinically trained interviewers (rather than the lay interviewers used in most studies) and extensive data on physical health
status. In a follow-up study, Martin and Jacobi (2006) reported a rate of DSM-IV hypochondriasis of 0.05% with higher rates of subthreshold
hypochondriasis (0.58%) and illness worries lasting more than 6 months (2.12%). Even though persons in the two latter groups did not
meet the full criteria for hypochondriasis, they clearly had higher comorbidity with psychiatric and medical disorders, higher health care
utilization and lower quality of life than persons without a mental disorder.
Sunderland et al. (2013) reported data on health anxiety gathered in a nationally representative sample in Australia using the CIDI. This
survey included four items focused on health anxiety but did not include the full criteria for the DSM-IV somatoform disorders. The first
question asked whether the respondent had ever worried a lot about serious illness despite reassurance from a doctor. Follow-up questions
established whether the worry had gone on for 6 months or more, and whether it was present during the last year and currently. Significant
health anxiety affected 5.7% of Australians across the lifespan and 3.4% met criteria for health anxiety at the time of the interview. Age,
employment status, smoking status and in particular comorbid physical conditions were significantly related to health anxiety. Health
anxiety was associated with significantly higher levels of distress, impairment and disability.
Functional somatic symptoms and worries about health are more common among those who are over 45 (Rief et al., 2001). Studies of
worry among individuals in different age groups indicate that older people worry less in general than younger people. However, worry about
health is common among older respondents (El-Gabalawy et al., 2013; Hunt et al., 2003). In old age, many serious health problems (such
as cancer and heart disease) are more common. Older adults also frequently deal with serious illness among family members and friends.
Elevated levels of health anxiety are more common in persons with chronic conditions such as breast cancer (Jones et al., 2014) and multiple
sclerosis (Alberts et al., 2011) than in the general population. In these situations, assistance in dealing with elevated health anxiety may be
beneficial. A good review of the epidemiology of hypochondriasis in medical settings is provided by Creed and Barsky (2004).


Assessment
Clinician evaluation and self-report instruments are the central strategies in a comprehensive assessment. Structured interviews are the research standard in diagnosing somatic symptom and related disorders. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5; First et al., 2015) may be used for evaluating DSM-5 disorders. The CIDI (WHO, 1991) can be used with both ICD-10 and DSM-IV criteria. Structured diagnostic interviews may not be practical in a clinical setting and, furthermore, the relevant sections of the SCID and the CIDI are not extensive.
The assessment interview
Table 19.3 provides questions we have used with health anxiety and somatization, both for establishing diagnoses and for assessing potential treatment targets. Before initiating this discussion, it is important to review the status of the client's health and history of health problems.
In working through the questions in the table, providing clients with examples of some of these items can be helpful. You may, for example, want to ask specifically whether the person ever probes his body for lumps or how often he checks his moles. Clients may be embarrassed by their behaviours and may not volunteer information about them unless the clinician asks specific questions in a relaxed and non-judgemental way. The more detail you can obtain about the individual's health anxiety and somatic concerns, and the accompanying fears and behaviours, the easier it will be to plan effective interventions.
Case formulation is an essential step in developing an effective treatment plan. In pulling together the information from the assessment, a thorough review of the client's history, including potential predisposing, precipitating and perpetuating factors, is critical. Many individuals report an extensive history of difficult life experiences of illness and death, often dating from childhood. Unresolved grief is also common.

The onset or exacerbation of the disorder at a stressful time in the person's life is typical. Once the disorder becomes well established,
perpetuating factors often make it difficult to break out of the pattern of excessive worry about health and disability. A thorough
understanding of these factors will help in developing an intervention that fits the individual.
Self-report measures of health anxiety
A number of self-report instruments provide useful information about health anxiety and somatization. For comprehensive reviews of
assessment strategies and questionnaire measures, we recommend Longley et al. (2014), Abramowitz and Braddock (2008) and Stewart and
Watt (2001). Measures of hypochondriasis that we typically use are the Illness Attitude Scales (IAS; Kellner, 1986, 1987) and the Short Health
Anxiety Inventory (SHAI; Salkovskis et al., 2002). The IAS includes 27 items measuring fears, beliefs and attitudes about health and illness.
Items are rated on a 5-point scale and nine scale scores may be calculated. This instrument has adequate test-retest reliability and good
discriminative validity, and successfully identifies patients diagnosed with hypochondriasis. The internal consistency of the nine scales
may, however, be problematic. Evaluations of the factor structure of the IAS (Stewart & Watt, 2001) suggest that the most robust factors
are worry about illness and pain, disease conviction, health habits and symptom interference with lifestyle. The SHAI, which is the 18-item
version of the 64-item Health Anxiety Inventory (HAI; Salkovskis et al., 2002), is broader in focus than the IAS and assesses a range of health
anxiety concerns. This instrument is particularly useful in assessing health anxiety in community and primary care samples and in broader
clinical populations. The SHAI has a similar factor structure across individuals with and without medical problems (Alberts et al., 2011).
Table 19.3 Interview questions for health anxiety and somatization
Topics
Suggested interview questions

General questions about health concerns
• Are you worried about your health? Could you tell me about that?
• Do family members or friends say that you worry too much about your
health?
• Does your doctor say you worry too much about your health?
• Which illnesses do you worry about?
• Are there specific physical symptoms that you are concerned about?
• Describe each symptom you have been concerned about.
• Do you worry a lot about death and dying?
• What seems to set off an episode of worry about your health? Bodily
symptoms? News stories about disease? Illness in a friend or family
member?
Extent of difficulty with illness and symptom
concerns
• In the last 12 months, how many months did you worry a lot about
having or getting a serious illness?
• How much did these worries about health interfere with your life or
activities?
• In the last 12 months, how many months were you worried about
specific physical symptoms?

• How much did these physical symptoms interfere with your life or
activities?
Effects of help- seeking
• Have you seen a doctor to check about this illness or symptom?
• Have you had any tests or examinations for this problem?
• Have you ever been afraid to go to the doctor because you were worried
that she might find a serious problem?
• Have you seen other health care providers about this problem?
• How effective was the care you received?
Response to the doctor's evaluation
• Were you satisfied with how the doctor handled your health concerns?
• Do you think the doctor was mistaken?
• Are you worried that the doctor may have missed a serious health
problem?
• Even though the doctor reassured you, did you later start worrying again
about your health?
• Do you think something more should be done to check into or help with
the symptom?

Checking and reassurance- seeking
• Do you check your body to see if you are healthy or to see if there is
something wrong? If yes, how do you do that? How often?
• Do you check the symptom, such as
?
• Do you check your bodily fluids to see if something is wrong? (I mean
things like checking your urine or stool.) If yes, how often?
• Do you talk to your family and friends about your bodily symptoms to get
their reactions? If yes, how often?
• Do you spend time reading about health problems or looking up medical
information on the Internet? If yes, how much time?
Avoidance
• Are there things you feel uncomfortable doing because of your health
worries?
• Do you avoid doing certain things because of the symptoms?
• Are you bothered by things that remind you of sickness and death? Do
you avoid some of those things?
Note: © 2014 by Patricia Furer and John R. Walker.

Another commonly used measure of health anxiety is the Whiteley Index (Pilowsky, 1967), which has been used for many years and has
good test-retest reliability. It is also useful in identifying possible cases of hypochondriasis but may lack discriminative validity (e.g. it
may not distinguish well between individuals with hypochondriasis and panic disorder). Traditionally, it has been used with true/false
responses, but it can also be used with a 5-point Likert rating scale (Barsky et al., 1992). The Health Anxiety Questionnaire (Lucock & Morley,
1996) and the Multidimensional Inventory of Hypochondriacal Traits (Longley et al., 2005) are other options. We typically supplement the
health anxiety measures with the Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories (Beck, 1996; Beck et al., 1988) and the Symptom Checklist 90
Revised (SCL-90R; Derogatis, 1975). Comorbid disorders are very common, so it is helpful to assess and monitor symptoms of anxiety and
depression. The SCL-90R is useful as a broad measure of distress that enquires about a range of health and mental health issues, and includes
a useful somatization subscale that assesses symptoms such as headaches, dizziness, stomach pain and back pain.
Diagnostic challenges: comorbidity
One of the challenges facing clinicians working in the area of health anxiety and somatization is whether there is, in fact, organic disease
to account for a client's somatic symptoms. Conscientious communication with the client's family physician or other medical consultants
is important. By the time clients come to us, they have typically had extensive contact with the health care system but they continue to be
highly anxious about their health. It is common for a person to have extensive medical investigations that reveal no disease while problems
with severe health anxiety go untreated. Even when no organic cause for physical symptoms has been found, we acknowledge to the client
that it is possible a significant illness may reveal itself on any day. The problem of health anxiety exists even for people who do have severe
diagnosed illness, and the issues tackled in treatment of health anxiety are important for people, whether or not they have a life-threatening
illness. One might call this an agnostic approach. Our goal over the course of treatment is to help clients become good consumers of health
care so that should a health problem requiring treatment arise, clients will deal with this appropriately.


Other diagnostic challenges arise out of the substantial overlap between health anxiety, somatization, and other disorders with prominent
symptoms of anxiety and depression, such as panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), obsessive-compulsive disorder, and major
depressive disorder. The clinician must determine which diagnoses best represent a client's concerns and which problems to target first in
treatment. Detailed information about the diagnostic overlap and comorbidity between health anxiety and other disorders is provided by
Sunderland et al. (2013).

Treatment of health anxiety

Cognitive behaviour therapy for somatization
The application of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) to somatization was described initially by Salkovskis (1989) and later by Sharpe et
al. (1992). The extensive literature that has developed in this area has been reviewed by Allen and Woolfolk (2010), Woolfolk and Allen
(2007), Kroenke (2007), and Looper and Kirmayer (2002). Two studies are described shortly as examples. Speckens et al. (1995) described
a clinical trial comparing CBT with optimized medical care in a general medical outpatient clinic of a teaching hospital in the Netherlands.
Patients were asked to complete a general health questionnaire and a checklist of somatic symptoms. Of the patients with medically
unexplained symptoms, 39 were assigned to the CBT condition and 40 to the control condition of optimized medical care. CBT was carried
out individually in the clinic over a range of 6 to 16 sessions. For the optimized medical care condition, the quality of care was enhanced with
additional training for the primary care physicians in detection and management of psychiatric disorders (90 minutes every 3 months). At 6
months, those in the CBT condition had a higher recovery rate, lower intensity of symptoms, less disturbed sleep, reduced illness behaviour,
and improved social functioning and recreation. The differences between the groups were maintained at 12-month follow-up.
In a randomized controlled trial (RCT), Allen et al. (2006) compared standard medical care with a psychiatric consultation to the same care
augmented by 10 sessions of individual CBT for patients with full-blown DSM-IV somatization disorder. Due to the very demanding DSM


criteria for somatization disorder, these participants would have much more extensive somatization symptoms than those included in many
other studies. The intervention followed the author's structured treatment manual (Woolfolk & Allen, 2007). The treatment was described
to participants as a form of stress management. There was a high acceptance rate among those invited to join the study and a low rate of
attrition (just under 10%) relative to other studies in this area. At post-assessment independent evaluators rated 40% of those in the CBT
group to be much or very much improved as compared to 7% in the consultation-only group. These results were maintained at 12-month
follow-up. There was a greater reduction in health care costs for the CBT group than the comparison group.
Cognitive behaviour therapy for health anxiety
The number of studies reported in this area has been growing and the results to this point are promising. The treatment strategies have
been drawn from previous work on anxiety disorders, particularly panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and generalized anxiety
disorder.
The pioneers in the area of CBT and hypochondriasis have been the group at Oxford University (including Salkovskis, Warwick, Clark
and others). Their procedures are summarized in Warwick and Marks (1988), Warwick et al. (1996), Clark et al. (1998), and Warwick
and Salkovskis (2001). Other interesting early studies in this area were conducted by Bouman and Visser (1998) and Visser and Bouman
(2001). These authors compared separate behavioural and cognitive treatments to a waiting-list control condition. Both active treatments
were found to be equally effective while there was no improvement in the waiting-list condition. The finding of clinically significant
improvements with primarily behavioural and primarily cognitive treatments suggests that the procedures involved in cognitive behaviour
therapy are robust and may not be degraded by small changes in procedure.
Bouman (2014) provides an interesting review of CBT and psychoeducational approaches (including bibliotherapy) for hypochondriasis.
Controlled trials, uncontrolled trials, case studies and case series are reviewed, and Bouman draws the conclusion that there is substantial
evidence that psychological treatments – CBT in particular – are helpful in reducing hypochondriacal symptoms.


Olatunji et al. (2014) provide a recent meta-analysis of controlled trials of CBT for hypochondriasis. These authors included 13 studies
with a total sample size of 1,081 participants. The authors conclude that CBT was more effective than control conditions (including
treatment as usual, waiting-list, psychological placebo and pill placebo). A greater number of CBT sessions was associated with larger effect
sizes at post-treatment. There was some evidence that not all treatment gains were maintained at follow-up assessments, which underscores
the importance of planning for setbacks and addressing relapse prevention. The authors also note that CBT is particularly effective, relative
to control conditions, for those with higher levels of hypochondriasis/health anxiety. This meta-analysis also revealed that CBT targeting
hypochondriasis may also significantly reduce symptoms of depression.
The procedures used in individual CBT for health anxiety and somatization are described in more detail by Furer et al. (2007), Abramowitz
and Braddock (2011), Owens and Antony (2011), Taylor and Asmundson (2004), Tyrer (2013) and Warwick and Salkovskis (2001).
Individual CBT is clearly established as an effective treatment for health anxiety. There is a developing literature examining other
treatment modalities, applications with different clinical populations and variations on the CBT approach. Hedman and colleagues
(Hedman, Andersson, Andersson et al., 2013; Hedman, Andersson, Lindefors et al., 2013) have developed an Internet-delivered CBT
protocol for severe health anxiety that produces significant and durable effects. Trials of group CBT (Hedman et al., 2010) and group
cognitive educational treatment (Bouman, 2002; Bouman & Buwalda, 2008) for health anxiety suggest these are viable approaches with
this population. Eilenberg et al. (2013) describe an interesting pilot study looking at group therapy for health anxiety using an acceptance
and commitment therapy approach. McManus et al. (2012) provide a randomized trial demonstrating the superiority of manualized, group-
based, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy over treatment as usual. These findings build on a small pilot study examining mindfulness-
based cognitive therapy for health anxiety (Lovas & Barsky, 2010), suggesting that this might be a promising treatment approach.
Tyrer et al. (2011) provide a randomized controlled trial demonstrating that CBT for health anxiety is also effective for medical
patients attending specialty services such as cardiology, gastroenterology and neurology. Bourgault-Fagnou and Hadjistavropoulos (2013)
demonstrate the superiority of CBT over a waiting-list control condition with a population of older adults.


Pharmacotherapy for health anxiety and somatization
Clearly, it is desirable for the specialist in psychological treatments to have a good working knowledge of common pharmacological
treatments in this area. This is necessary to provide information about treatment options and to be able to provide good support to
clients concurrently receiving pharmacological treatment. This is the most widely available treatment for most mental disorders (Wang
et al., 2006). Enns et al. (2001) point out that many persons with these conditions experience comorbid anxiety or depressive disorders,
and pharmacological treatments (usually selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
(SNRIs)) are widely used in these disorders. The clinician working on psychological treatment can encourage appropriate compliance with
medication and assist the client in troubleshooting any problems. Many clients' symptoms fluctuate because of inconsistency in taking
medication. Others misinterpret the significance of medication side effects (such as sexual difficulties) that some experience with these
treatments.
There is a much smaller body of research on pharmacological than psychological treatments for health anxiety and somatization. Recent
studies, however, suggest that pharmacological treatments are effective with these problems. A particularly strong study was a 16-week
RCT comparing CBT, the SSRI paroxetine, and placebo in the treatment of DSM-IV hypochondriasis by Greeven et al. (2007). The responder
analysis with the intent-to-treat and completer cohorts indicated that in the CBT condition 45% and 54% met the criteria for response,
compared to 30% and 38% in the paroxetine group and 14% and 12% in the placebo group. On the continuous measures, both active
treatments produced more change than the placebo group but they did not differ statistically from each other. The number of CBT sessions
was flexible depending on response to treatment, with up to 16 allowed. The average number of sessions completed was 7.3. Participants in
the study were followed over 18 months (Greeven et al., 2009) and were offered continued or alternative treatments if they wished. Generally
those in the follow-up maintained or furthered the gains present at the post-assessment. Significantly more of the paroxetine group (55%)
received psychological or pharmacological treatment during the follow-up period compared to those in the CBT group (25%).


Fallon et al. (2008) conducted a 12-week RCT comparing the SSRI fluoxetine with placebo in patients with hypochondriasis (DSM-IV
criteria). Considerably more in the fluoxetine group than the placebo group were rated as responders after 12 weeks (62.5% vs. 33.3%).
The SSRI escitalopram has been evaluated in the treatment of multi-somatoform disorder (Muller et al., 2008). This condition is defined
when a person has three or more bothersome, medically unexplained physical symptoms, together with a history of somatization for at least
2 years (Kroenke et al., 1997). The RCT, covering 12 weeks of treatment, compared the medication to placebo. Escitalopram was superior to
placebo on a wide range of outcome measures (including measures of depression, anxiety and somatic symptoms). In the medication group,
84.0% were judged to be responders as compared to 26.9% in the placebo group.
A review of medication treatments for somatic symptom and related disorders indicates that there are a range of open trials of treatments
for these disorders with a limited number of RCTs for most conditions (Somashekar et al., 2013). Generally the findings have been
encouraging, although there are few studies considering the results of treatment beyond the brief study phases (6 to 12 weeks) and little
research concerning outcome if treatment is discontinued.
A specific approach to cognitive behavioural treatment
Our clinical service is based in the outpatient anxiety disorders programme of a teaching hospital. Over the years, we became aware that
clients with various anxiety disorders were also having difficulty with health anxiety (Furer et al., 1997). For some of these individuals,
the health concerns were severe, persistent, and required specific intervention. Our approach incorporates findings from the research
summarized earlier, and our experience in treating panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and death
anxiety. As we refined our approach, we placed increasing emphasis on the role of exposure to illness worries and to illness-related
situations, and introduced exposure strategies early in the treatment (Furer & Walker, 2005). The programme can be administered in either
group or individual treatment format. Components may be implemented on a flexible basis using the cognitive and behavioural assessment

and case formulation. The following treatment description focuses on the application of this approach to health anxiety. A similar treatment
approach applies to other presentations of somatization. In every case, we adapt the approach to target the problems identified in the
assessment and case formulation.
Some aspects of the problem may cause particular interference and disability. In planning treatment, these may warrant attention first.
The client (or therapist) may identify priorities that influence the initial treatment goals. On the other hand, the clinician may see some
areas where improvement is likely to come quickly, and may provide encouragement to the client so he or she can persist through the more
difficult areas of the treatment (such as facing the reality of illness and death). The components of treatment are described individually, but
we typically implement more than one component simultaneously. We often emphasize response prevention early in treatment because this
frequently results in a relatively rapid decrease in anxiety if checking and reassurance-seeking are prominent. We might also concurrently
introduce activities that improve the enjoyment of life. A treatment manual for the client (see Furer et al., 2007) provides educational
material about the problem, descriptions of the treatment components, clinically based examples and detailed homework assignments.
A typical session involves introduction and discussion of new material, review of previous homework, and preparation of homework
assignments for the coming week.
The primary treatment strategies covered in the programme are (1) educational material describing a CBT model of health anxiety,
(2) response prevention, (3) exposure to illness worries, (4) establishing personal goals and enhancing life satisfaction, (5) strategies for
overcoming avoidance of illness-related situations, (6) methods of coping with fear of death, (7) cognitive reappraisal and (8) relapse
prevention.
Psychoeducation on the cognitive behavioural model of health anxiety
It is critical to provide individuals with an explanation of how health anxiety may have developed and how CBT can be useful. Clients are
often receptive to an explanation of health anxiety that suggests there are common triggers for worries about health. These triggers may

include bodily symptoms or changes in physiological function that are interpreted as signs of serious disease. Health worries may also be
provoked by external triggers such as reading or hearing about illness. Checking the body for signs and symptoms and seeking reassurance
about one's health are behaviours that may develop as strategies to cope with anxiety. Avoidance of illness and death-related situations may
also begin as attempts to reduce fear. Over time, these strategies increase health anxiety.
Many clients are already aware, to some degree, of how their thoughts and their reactions to body sensations can increase and maintain
their health fears. We ask our clients to observe the impact of focusing on their body symptoms by having them experiment with
deliberately attending to a specific body sensation. Clients experience how this can quickly increase the intensity of a sensation and the
sense of alarm. Constant attention to body sensations can result in exceptional skill at detecting even minor changes in the body, triggering
further anxiety. Clients need to understand how bodily checking, reassurance-seeking and avoidance of illness and death-related situations
can increase this anxiety.
Carefully reviewing the components of the model (see Figure 19.1) with examples from the individual's experience are essential to the
educational process. This provides a new perspective on health anxiety and an explanation of approaches to breaking the pattern of anxiety.


Internal triggers
External triggers
Illness thought
Anxiety, fear
Checking,
reassurance-seeking
Bodily sensations
Temporary decrease
of anxiety and fear
Interpretation of
sensations as sign of serious illness

Figure 19.1 Health anxiety: cognitive-behavioural model
Case study continued
What follows is a continuation of the case study described in the opening paragraph of this chapter.
Maria identified several internal and external triggers for her health anxiety. The most significant internal trigger was seeing something
red (which looked like blood or was blood) in her throat, nose, urine or stool. Other triggers included new physical symptoms such as a rash
or a lump, and media stories about illnesses (external triggers). Bodily sensations when she was anxious were muscle tension, headaches and
fatigue. Catastrophic cognitions included "Blood in my urine means I have cancer and will die" and "I can't enjoy life if there is any chance
I have cancer." Checking behaviours were prominent in Maria's daily routine. She went to the toilet frequently to check her stool and urine
for blood. She often found herself in front of a mirror, examining the back of her throat and her nose for signs of blood and she would ask
her husband to check her symptoms. Maria checked the Internet for information about symptoms and found frightening descriptions of
diseases involving these symptoms.
Response prevention
In the same way that bodily checking and reassurance-seeking play a critical role in obsessive-compulsive disorder, these behaviours are
often prominent in health anxiety and hypochondriasis. Typical examples of checking behaviours include probing the body for lumps,
checking the skin for moles or changes in the moles, monitoring pulse rate and blood pressure, checking for weight loss, monitoring pain
levels or unusual bodily sensations, and frequent breast self-examinations. Reassurance-seeking strategies may include asking a family
member, friend or health care provider about symptoms and researching symptoms or diseases in medical textbooks or on the Internet.
Excessive or stereotyped use of health foods, vitamin supplements and other unusual health-related behaviours may also be potential
targets for change. Some individuals may have difficulty identifying ways in which they check their bodies or obtain reassurance because

these behaviours are so automatic or routine. The clinician should explore this area thoroughly, keeping in mind that to the client these may
be private and embarrassing behaviours.
Once checking and reassurance-seeking behaviours are identified, clients are asked to monitor them, using a diary. The goals of
monitoring include identifying a baseline frequency of the behaviours and developing behaviour analysis skills. Clients record the situation,
their anxious thoughts, and their initial anxiety level (on a scale of 0 to 10). They then provide a detailed description of the checking/
reassurance-seeking behaviour and record their subsequent anxiety level (to determine whether the behaviour increases or decreases
anxiety). Some clients report immediate anxiety reduction, but generally this is short-lived; the anxiety rebounds and the individual may
then engage in the behaviour again. Interestingly, many individuals describe either no anxiety reduction or even an increase in anxiety
related to checking and reassurance-seeking. However, they may believe that checking is a preventative strategy, that is, “If I don’t check my
moles today then I will be even more worried about them tomorrow, so I better check.” Understanding the pattern of anxiety in relation to
checking and reassurance-seeking will help in planning the response prevention approach. If the client has many checking or reassurance-
seeking behaviours, we may focus on only three or four behaviours at first to facilitate monitoring.
Case study continued
What follows is a continuation of the case study described in the opening paragraph of this chapter, and continued in earlier sections on
treatment of health anxiety.
Maria monitored various checking behaviours daily for several weeks. She recorded how often and for how long she checked her urine and
stool for signs of blood. She also monitored the frequency of her nasal and throat checks (duration was not monitored because these checks
took less than 30 seconds). We asked Maria to record the frequency and triggers of any other bodily checking that she noticed such as probing
her abdomen for lumps. She monitored her reassurance-seeking behaviours a few weeks later, as they were not as troublesome.

Once the diaries have revealed patterns of checking and reassurance-seeking, clients select several behaviours they wish to decrease.
We discuss various approaches to response prevention, including postponing the target behaviours, gradually decreasing their frequency,
or simply stopping the behaviour altogether (Foa & Wilson, 2001). Response prevention homework is determined between the client and
therapist. It is critical that the client decide on a response prevention assignment he or she feels able to implement successfully. We
inform clients that they may experience a temporary increase in anxiety as they work on decreasing their checking or reassurance-seeking
behaviours. This increased anxiety is generally short-lived. Many clients are surprised by how quickly they can reduce their focus on their
bodies and health anxiety, using response prevention.
One of the challenges here is helping individuals determine whether their health-monitoring behaviours are reasonable and healthy or
whether they are excessive and detrimental. For example, some physicians recommend monthly breast self-examination as a preventative
health care strategy. This is a clear directive, and most women would agree that daily examinations are not helpful or necessary and would
likely increase worry about breast health. Other health care recommendations are not as specific. For example, physicians recommend that
people be aware of their moles and report any significant changes. Does this mean daily checking? Is monthly or bimonthly monitoring
reasonable? If a person notes a change, do they need to report immediately to their physician's office or can they wait until their next regular
visit? These are some of the issues to be discussed in treatment to establish reasonable frequencies.
Response prevention is an important strategy throughout treatment. For example, when the client begins working on facing feared
situations in the exposure component of the programme, it is important to ensure that the checking and reassurance-seeking behaviours are
kept under control. For some clients, the urge to check their bodies for symptoms will increase again when they are, for example, visiting a
cancer-care ward as part of their exposure homework.
Exposure to Illness Worries
Many individuals with health anxiety or hypochondriasis worry that if illness is not already present, it will soon develop. Some are afraid

their worrying will make it more likely they will develop the illness ("I have to stop worrying or I will give myself cancer"). These worries
often are present even when the client is not experiencing somatic symptoms and when disease conviction is low. We target these fears of
developing a serious illness using both imaginal and in vivo exposure (Furer & Walker, 2005). These strategies draw on approaches that are
helpful in working with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD; Dugas et al., 2003; Ladouceur et al., 2000) and obsessive-compulsive disorder
(Foa & Wilson, 2001; McLean et al., 2001).
An imaginal exposure strategy we have found particularly useful is having clients write a narrative describing in detail their worries and
fears about developing or having a particular illness. Clients typically write two or three illness stories targeting their major health worries.
We encourage clients to make the story as real and emotionally evocative as possible as they imagine their worst fears coming true. The
illness story includes the bodily feelings and possible signs of illness that trigger the worry, as well as the doubts about whether to seek
medical attention and whether there was anything they could have done to prevent the illness. Clients are encouraged to describe the stages
of the illness and their worries at each point along the way, including being extremely ill, dependent on others and facing death. Clients
also include their worries about how their illness and death would affect loved ones. The experience of writing this narrative is often very
emotional and intense, and in itself serves as an exposure exercise. The following story details one of Maria's worst fears: developing skin
cancer. (Maria is the subject of the case study described in the opening paragraph of this chapter, and continued in earlier sections on
treatment of health anxiety.)
Case Study Continued
I was checking out my moles as I usually do. To my horror I discovered that one of the moles has changed dramatically. It is no longer circular,
but a strange irregular shape and it has grown larger than I remember it being. The usual brown colour is now splotchy, with different shades
of brown and black. I touch the mole and it doesn't hurt, but it feels slightly raised and bumpy. I have been panicking all day, but I am too

afraid to call Dr Carter. If this is cancer, all my most horrible worries will have finally come true. The mere thought of having cancer or dying
sends me into a terrible state of crying and anxiety.
My husband, Bob, finally makes me call and I have an appointment with the doctor. Dr Carter agrees that the mole is highly suspicious and
I am to see a dermatologist. Even though she didn't say it, I could tell from the look on her face that it is very serious. I can't get the thought
of having skin cancer out of my mind, even though it hasn't been confirmed yet. I can't eat, relax, sleep or even breathe very well because all
this stress is making my asthma worse. What did I do to deserve this? Will I need chemo and radiation? Melanoma is usually fatal. I can't die
because I can't imagine what it would be like not to be able to play with my dogs and hold hands with Bob. If I die, will I know I am dead? Will
I be very upset and lonely? I can't imagine just ceasing to be.
I go to the dermatologist and he confirms everything. I do have melanoma and it is at an advanced stage. He makes an appointment for me
at the Cancer Centre. I am so upset, I am crying through the entire appointment. Not only do I have melanoma but it is at an advanced stage,
which to me pretty much guarantees I am going to die. When I tell Bob, he begins to cry, which is very unlike him. Seeing him so upset sends
me into an uncontrollable, inconsolable fit of anger and crying. I can't die because I love my family too much. I can't imagine being dead and
Bob moving on with another woman (even though he should). I am worried that the sheer stress of the next few months and years might be
too much for him and maybe he will break up with me. He swore that he would be with me through everything, but this is too much to ask
of him.
I'm going to be so sick from the treatment but it might not make any difference. I go ahead with the treatment because I'm too scared to die,
but if I am ultimately going to die, my final months will be full of sickness and pain. This is just too much to bear. The chemo started today. I
am now terribly sick from my first infusion. I keep throwing up even though there is nothing left to throw up and all the retching is making
my stomach and head hurt. Bob is taking care of me the best he can, but it breaks my heart knowing I will likely die and I won't be able to see
or touch him again. So, I'm trying to distance myself from him but he won't let me. He has caught on to my plan.

I'm starting to have problems walking and I stumble a lot and speech is becoming increasingly difficult. If I'm going to die, why do I have to
suffer like this? Today I have my first radiation treatment. I feel so very tired and the area that was radiated is already red and itchy. Between
the fatigue of radiation and the vomiting from the chemo, I feel like I am dying already. The doctors say there hasn't been much improvement
despite all the chemo I've received so far, but they are still hoping. My eyes and fingernails are starting to take on a yellowish cast. My family
is trying to keep my spirits up and they are trying to be hopeful, but I can't focus on anything other than my horrible side effects and my
ultimate fate.
I've finished all the chemo and the radiation, and still no improvement. I have now been admitted to the palliative service at the hospital.
I have extreme difficulty doing anything for myself now because my brain has been taken over by cancer. It is so hard to face my family and
see the sorrow and pain in their eyes. How could this have happened to me? There had to have been an earlier sign than just the mole being
different. How could I have missed it? Why can't the doctors do anything more for me? What if I start to die and my family isn't around?
I think today is the day I am going to die. I feel a tremendous amount of anxiety and fear. I hope my family senses this because I have lost
the ability to tell them. I can only blink my eyes now and I find it difficult to understand what everyone says sometimes. I am struggling to
stay awake now. I feel like I am going to sleep. I am fighting it because I am afraid I will never wake up and I will never see my family again.
Bob is holding my hand and stroking my forehead. As I try to vomit, I end up aspirating and suddenly I feel like I am having a terrible asthma
attack and I absolutely cannot breathe. My family is panicking, the nurses rush in, and I struggle to keep my eyes open ... I finally close my
eyes and I am gone.
We ask clients to read their illness stories repeatedly (either out loud or to themselves) and to use the story to assist them in imagining
that the feared events are actually happening. Some clients prefer to make an audiotape of their narratives. In group treatment, it can be
very useful to have group members share their illness stories in session for additional exposure practice (both for themselves and the other
group members). As with all exposure exercises, it is important that the client is aware there may be a temporary increase in anxiety as they
think about difficult issues they may have avoided for a long time. The anxiety will then decline and the health concerns will become less

anxiety-evoking. The purpose of the exercise is not to mechanically read or listen to a story, but rather to use the narrative to stimulate the
imagination in this very difficult situation. We continue the exposure practice over several weeks and clients develop new narratives as their
anxiety with the initial story decreases.
Some clients are puzzled that we ask them to focus on their fears using this exposure strategy, when they already obsess about their health.
It is important to make the distinction between facing fears in a planned way, and worrying about health and disease in an uncontrolled
fashion. Often, individuals will try manoeuvres to eliminate the worry and to convince themselves that their worst fears will not come true.
Individuals will often try to "get the worry out of their mind," or to escape from their fear by using distraction or avoidance. The approach of
facing fears directly with exposure is quite different. Exposure involves a planned, systematic strategy of scheduling time to face fears and
worries. The goal is to take control of the worrying rather than having the worry come unexpectedly. This increases clients' confidence in the
ability to handle fears. Repeatedly facing the thoughts of illness and death, and accepting the reality that these things do happen, allows the
individual to face even difficult and unpleasant possibilities more calmly.
Establishing Goals and Enhancing Life Satisfaction
Shifting the focus from death and dying to life and living can go a long way to reducing anxiety and worry. We take a two-pronged approach
to facilitate this shift. First, clients identify a list of goals, beginning with their life goals. Identifying concrete and specific broad goals can
assist in the development of more immediate goals. Clients are prompted to consider what they would want out of life if they were not
hampered by health anxiety. They then work on developing clear, behaviourally based, medium- and short-term goals that will help them
achieve their life goals. The medium-term goals are those the client could work on within a year, and the short-term goals could be targeted
within 3 months. We encourage clients to set goals that involve moving ahead with activities in spite of anxiety.
For some individuals, the task of developing goals, especially long-term goals, is very challenging. Some clients have completely ceased
thinking about the future, as they are sure they will soon be very ill or dying. Working first on short-term goals can be more productive with

these individuals. For example, if clients are sure they will be dead in a year, we encourage them to think about what they would like to do
and accomplish during this year (e.g. spend more time with friends on a weekly basis, travel to their hometown to visit relatives). Clients are
often surprised by what they can accomplish as they work on these immediate goals. This may facilitate the development of long-term goals.
Case Study Continued
What follows is a continuation of the case study described in the opening paragraph of this chapter, and continued in earlier sections on
treatment of health anxiety.
Maria's goals included improving her relationship with her partner and learning how to manage conflict between them more productively,
interacting more with her co-workers, spending more time with her family, and developing a healthier lifestyle. Other goals focused on
reducing health anxiety and included being able to attend prayers for her mother, visiting friends who were ill, and being able to have a
medical test without calling the lab daily to enquire about the results.
A second strategy to help clients focus on living is to work on building life satisfaction. Clients are asked to keep track of activities that give
them a sense of pleasure or satisfaction. Many clients are surprised to find that small things in life give them pleasure (e.g. a phone call to
a friend or spending time with a young relative). Some individuals find it helpful to think about what kinds of things they used to enjoy as
children or as young adults. We then ask clients to consider whether they have enough fun in their lives, and if not, to schedule more daily
activities that give them satisfaction or pleasure. Increasing pleasurable activities often has a quick and significant impact on their fears
about health and dying.
Case Study Continued
What follows is a continuation of the case study described in the opening paragraph of this chapter, and continued above in earlier sections
on treatment of health anxiety.

Maria found that going on regular dates with her husband had the dual effect of increasing the amount of fun she was having and
improving their relationship. Maria also focused on making time for her artistic endeavours that gave her a strong sense of personal
satisfaction.
Overcoming Avoidance of Illness-Related Situations
Many individuals cope with their health anxiety by avoiding situations that cause them fear or discomfort, such as going to funerals, visiting
friends and family who are seriously ill or dying, writing a will, going to the doctor, reading articles about illness and death, and doing
monthly breast self-examinations. We discuss the short- and long-term effects of avoiding these situations, and highlight the erosion of
self-confidence and gradual increase in avoidance. We encourage clients to face their fears daily in a systematic and repeated fashion, and
emphasize the importance of not engaging in bodily checking or reassurance-seeking when practising exposure.
Targets for exposure are selected from the client's list of short-term goals. If the goal is too difficult or too large, it is broken down into
smaller, more manageable steps that can be practised regularly. Each step is practised consistently until the anxiety is at a low or moderate
level before moving on to the next step. We encourage clients to spend at least 30 to 60 minutes per day practising. Each week, clients plan
out homework exposure exercises, using a daily assignment log, and track their success in attempting and/or completing these assignments.
Some of the same behaviours that are avoided and are targets for exposure for some clients serve as checking or reassurance-seeking
behaviours for other clients – then we encourage response prevention. For example, some individuals avoid reading newspaper stories with
health information, while others spend hours scouring the newspaper and the Internet for health information as a way to check out their
symptoms, to reassure themselves that they are healthy, or to be vigilant for signs of danger.
Exposure exercises may also involve exposure to bodily symptoms (Walker & Furer, 2008). Sensations that may trigger anxiety and fear
include dizziness, difficulty breathing, changes in heart rate, lumps, skin rashes and pain. We help clients identify sensations that trigger
anxiety and activities they avoid. Then, we encourage them to deliberately engage in physical activities that cause these sensations. For

example, aerobic exercise, such as brisk walking, dancing, climbing stairs, swimming or jogging, increases both heart rate and breathing rate
and can therefore be used as an exposure strategy for these physical symptoms. Deliberate hyperventilation (also used in exposure treatment
of panic disorder) is an excellent strategy for producing shortness of breath, tingling of the extremities, and light-headedness. The client
and therapist hyperventilate together during the session and then focus on the resulting sensations. We then observe how these unpleasant
sensations dissipate. If the sensations produced by hyperventilation are similar to those that distress the client, we will ask him or her to
hyperventilate once or twice a day to practise that exposure.
For bodily sensations that are difficult to produce deliberately (such as a rash, a headache or a lump), imaginal exposure strategies are
helpful. As with the illness stories, clients are asked to describe in vivid terms the body symptom they fear, the worries and doubts they
experience when they have this symptom, and the catastrophic consequences they worry about. For some clients, the body symptom and
illness stories are quite different, with the former tapping into fears about discomfort or disability related to the physical symptom itself
rather than fears about serious disease or death. For other clients, the stories are very similar. As with the illness stories, the body symptom
stories are reviewed for at least 30 minutes to stimulate imaginal exposure over a number of days until there is a considerable reduction in
the anxiety about the symptom.
Case Study Continued
What follows is a continuation of the case study described in the opening paragraph of this chapter, and continued in earlier sections on
treatment of health anxiety.
Maria found that regular practice visiting the hospital where her mother received her cancer treatment was challenging. It paid off by
giving her the freedom to visit the hospital with minimal anxiety. Maria also practised spending time with friends who had serious health
problems. An interesting exposure task that was helpful for Maria was regularly eating beets so she could practise having red colour in her
stool. Being careful not to check her stool during this practice was an important treatment component.

Coping with Fear of Death
For many individuals with health anxiety, fear of death is a central concern. It is important to address two main areas in dealing with fear of death. The first involves increasing appreciation and enjoyment of life and the second is to work on accepting the reality of death (see Furer & Walker, 2008).
Avoiding the issue of death seems to work for most people most of the time, and allows them to get on with their lives. At times, however, the usual ways of coping with fears of death break down. People may be constantly preoccupied with fears of death, illness, accident, injury and harm. These fears create intense distress, limit pleasure and satisfaction in life, disrupt close relationships, distract from working effectively and consume enormous amounts of energy. Many clients try hard not to think about death and try to avoid things that remind them of death. Other clients take the approach that if they take very good care of themselves or are very cautious about their health, then they will be able to postpone the time when they have to deal with their own illness and death. Sometimes they also want to identify any problem early so they can be rescued by the health care system before the problem becomes too serious. This approach denies the reality that while most of us will live to a ripe old age (and have a lot of potential time to enjoy life), death can come at any time and in many unexpected ways.
By directly facing fears of death and dying, and by accepting the inevitability of serious illness and death, the anxiety, distress and loss of satisfaction caused by fear of death can be reduced. We ask clients to consider any ways in which they may avoid thoughts or experiences related to death. Areas of avoidance can be addressed using the same exposure strategies outlined in the previous section. We also encourage clients to identify their anxious thoughts about death and to develop coping thoughts that can assist them in managing their fears (as outlined later in the cognitive reappraisal section).
When clients' fear of death is prominent, we ask them to complete several helpful exposure assignments: (1) making or updating a will; (2) discussing wishes for funeral arrangements with a family member; and (3) writing their own obituary. We provide reading material on

making a will, information from a non-profit funeral planning organization and several sample obituaries. The obituary should reflect an
early death rather than a death late in life. Articles, books and movies about coping with death are also very helpful in facilitating exposure.
We realize family members may be uncomfortable with these assignments, reflecting the discomfort with death that exists in our culture.
Case Study Continued
What follows is a continuation of the case study described in the opening paragraph of this chapter, and continued in earlier sections on
treatment of health anxiety.
One exposure exercise that seemed helpful for Maria was cutting out and saving newspaper obituaries of people her age. Initially, this task
produced substantial anxiety, but with repeated practice she was able to calmly face obituaries and stories about death.
Cognitive Reappraisal
When we began working with individuals with health anxiety, we encouraged work on identifying catastrophic thoughts and developing
coping thoughts quite early in the therapy. However, we have found it beneficial to emphasize exposure and response prevention first and
to focus on cognitive techniques later in the programme. Providing exposure and response prevention experiences early in the treatment
seems to result in significant change in cognition. Later in treatment we encourage clients to identify any illness-related thoughts that may
remain troubling. We have found the following exercise to be useful:
1. List the most common catastrophic thoughts you have about illness.
2. For each thought, note:
a. When does this thought tend to come to you?


b. What is the probability this negative event will happen? In considering this, if you have had this negative thought before, how often
has the negative outcome happened in the past? How often does this negative event happen to other people of your age? Do not ask
whether this negative event will happen in your lifetime (we are all likely to have serious illnesses in our lifetime). How likely is it
that it will happen today? This year?
c. If it did happen, how would you cope with it? Negative events happen to people throughout their lifetime - often not when they are
worrying about them but at an unexpected time.
d. This negative or catastrophic thought will occur again in the future. What are some coping thoughts you could use when this
negative or catastrophic thought happens again?
Question 2b deals with the probability of the negative event occurring. Most people have limited information on the probability of the
illnesses they fear. However, rather than using probability figures to reassure people that their worst fears will not come true, we emphasize
the importance of learning to tolerate uncertainty. All of us will have to face illness at various points in our lives, and death is a certainty. We
will not know in advance, however, what challenges we will have to face, so it is important to live life to the fullest until the time comes that
we have to cope with illness and death. Question 2c relates to the client's understanding of people's ability to cope with illness and death. We
emphasize that people are generally able to cope with these challenges with dignity, even though anxiety about illness and death is a normal
part of the coping process. Clients complete a self-monitoring diary to keep track of their anxious thoughts and ways to cope.
Case Study Continued
What follows is a continuation of the case study described in the opening paragraph of this chapter, and continued in earlier sections on
treatment of health anxiety.

Maria's coping thoughts to help her deal with blood in her urine included: "The blood may be a sign of cancer, but it may also be a kidney
stone. I will just try drinking more water and see how it works out." A coping thought she developed to cope with a small lump she found at
the back of her neck was: "It may be cancer but I have had lumps like this before and they were not cancer. I will just check it once per month
until my next doctor's visit and show it to my doctor then."

Relapse Prevention
Most people recovering from problems with health anxiety experience periods of increased symptoms even after significant progress. Many
find these setbacks extremely upsetting, feeling that their work and effort were for nothing, and they may lose confidence in their coping
strategies. At times, clients feel the entire approach they have been taking in therapy is wrong, and they must find a new way to deal with the
problem. Others may become discouraged and feel that nothing will ever help with the problem.
We encourage clients to have realistic expectations about the role that anxiety plays in each of our lives. Sickness and death are normal
parts of life and we will be confronted by this many times as the years go on. It is normal to think about these issues and to be apprehensive
when facing illness or death.
Certain experiences are often related to setbacks:
• A new physical symptom or the return of a previous symptom;
• A situation related to illness or death that has been avoided for a long time;
Serious illness, either in the client or someone close to him or her;
The loss of someone close (this can be through death, life changes, moves to other cities, etc.);
Threat to an important relationship or the end of an important relationship;
• Increased life stress.

A helpful approach for clients is to prepare for the inevitability of setbacks and to develop coping strategies. When clients experience an
increase in anxiety, we encourage them to continue applying the coping strategies they have learned and to keep working towards their
goals. At times, it may be helpful to go back to an easier level in working on goals in order to rebuild confidence. We recommend the following
process in dealing with a setback:

1. Analyze the situation(s) before the setback. In most cases you can identify important factors related to the setback. Understanding this
can give you more sense of control.
2. Review the coping strategies you have been using. Were you rusty in using some of your coping strategies? Did you let some bad habits
develop? Are there some additional coping strategies that would be helpful now?
3. Are you checking your body more frequently now? Are you asking others for reassurance about your symptoms more often? If you are,
work on decreasing these behaviours because, in the long run, checking and reassurance-seeking will make anxiety worse.
4. If you are having difficulty getting over the effects of a setback, consider getting support from a therapist or a group you have worked
with before. A setback is a good time to make sure you have solid support from family and friends, if possible.

The difference between having occasional worries and fears in difficult circumstances and having a problem with intense health anxiety
is knowing how to cope effectively. Thoughts about illness and death do not have to cause a major disruption in life. Thinking about these
issues in a constructive way is part of a healthy approach to life.
Relationships with Primary Care Providers and Medical Specialists
Individuals with somatoform disorders are often seen regularly by a primary care physician and by several other medical specialists. They
are frequently receiving some form of pharmacological treatment for symptom relief. All aspects of the treatment (including CBT) are more
likely to be successful if there is effective communication among the health professionals involved. Our programme emphasizes providing


information concerning treatment recommendations to primary care physicians when they are involved in the treatment. Generally, this
information is welcomed by the primary care provider and other medical specialists.
In CBT for health anxiety, clients are typically encouraged to limit their use of health services in reassurance-seeking and to care for
themselves in dealing with non-urgent symptoms (for example back pain, headaches, or cold symptoms) for several weeks before seeking
medical consultation. Most clients are able to manage this. If the response of another health care provider begins to feed into a pattern of
reassurance-seeking or excessive use of health care services, however, it may be helpful to discuss recommendations concerning treatment
with that provider. We contact the other professional with a brief letter (and a follow-up telephone contact if necessary) outlining our
suggestions, framed as recommendations to the client (rather than directives to the physician). The letter generally closes by indicating that
we would be happy to provide further information and would value any recommendations from the primary care provider.
Summary
Health anxiety is a common problem which may be triggered by physical symptoms, personal health experiences and health experiences
of others. It is often accompanied by excessive bodily checking and seeking reassurance. Health anxiety, hypochondriacal concern
and somatization may cause significant distress and interference with daily functioning. Historically, hypochondriasis and the other
somatoform disorders were viewed as being resistant to treatment. However, research over the last 20 years suggests that CBT is often
helpful. Effective CBT is based on comprehensive assessment and case formulation following the model in Figure 19.1. CBT treatment
strategies include psychoeducation, response prevention, exposure to illness worries, establishing personal goals and enhancing life
satisfaction, overcoming avoidance of illness-related situations, coping with fear of death, cognitive reappraisal and relapse prevention.


Skills Building Exercises
One advantage clinicians have in understanding health anxiety is that we have all had to deal with illness and death in our own lives. Usually
younger clinicians will have fewer of these experiences than older individuals. Here are some exercises to broaden experience in this area:
1. Develop a narrative describing an intense experience in this area, including your thoughts, emotions, bodily sensations and behaviours.
What were your responses before, during and after the experience? As examples, consider unpleasant medical or dental experiences,
serious illness or death in someone close, being with someone through the process of death or being present at a peaceful death.
2. Many people have had limited experiences with medical procedures, illness and death. You may broaden your experiences in these
areas by reading some of the excellent material available in these areas. Elizabeth Kübler-Ross has written extensively and has edited
an excellent series of accounts from individuals, family members and friends about coming to terms with death (Kübler-Ross, 1975).
Sherwin Nuland is a professor who focuses on surgery and the history of medicine. His book, How We Die (1994), provides detailed
medical accounts and first-person accounts of how people die from common causes such as cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's disease,
accidents and crime. Although the content is difficult, the presentation is compassionate. Cancer, heart disease and neurological
diseases are commonly feared. There are many excellent first-person and family accounts of dealing with these kinds of chronic
illnesses. (These materials may also be useful for clients.)
3. Individuals experiencing health anxiety are often exposed to uncomfortable tests and medical procedures (e.g. Margolis, 2001; Segen &
Stauffer, 1998). Review descriptions of these procedures and imagine your reactions as you experience these tests yourself.
4. Consider broadening your experiences related to medical procedures, illness and death by arranging to observe medical procedures (if
you work frequently in an area) or visiting a palliative care unit. If these opportunities are not available, speak to a friend or family
member about their experiences (including thoughts and emotions).

5. Think of a client you have seen or might see. List some of the exposure experiences available in your community (including exposure
through the use of television or videotapes) for themes related to illness and death.
6. You have just found out you have only 12 months to live. For about 6 months of this time you will be experiencing some symptoms but
you will be able to continue with many normal life activities. After this, your health will be more uncertain and it is not clear how much
energy you will have. Write a description of your thoughts and emotions in this situation and consider how you would like to spend
your remaining time. Write an obituary for your local newspaper. Write a plan for your funeral arrangements. Focus on your thoughts
and emotions. This project works best if you continue your journaling over a number of days.
Evidence Summaries
Allen, L., & Woolfolk, R. (2012). Somatoform and factitious disorders. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based
Practice in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 365-394). Chichester: Wiley.
Taylor, S., McKay, D., & Abramowitz, J. (2012). Hypochondriasis and health-related anxiety. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook
of Evidence-Based Practice in Clinical Psychology, Adult Disorders (pp. 603-619). Chichester: Wiley.
Further reading for Practitioners
Abramowitz, J., & Braddock, A. (2008). Treatment of Health Anxiety and Hypochondriasis: A Biopsychosocial Approach. Cambridge, MA:
Hogrefe and Huber.
Furer, P., Walker, J., & Stein, M. (2007). Treating Health Anxiety and Fear of Death: A Practitioner's Guide. New York: Springer.
Kübler-Ross, E. (Ed.) (1975). Death: The Final Stage of Growth. New York: Touchstone.

Nuland, S. (1994). How We Die. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Taylor, S., & Asmundson, G.J.G. (2004). Treating Health Anxiety: A Cognitive-Behavioural Approach. New York: The Guilford Press.
Tyrer, H. (2013). Tackling Health Anxiety: A CBT Handbook. London: RCPsych Publications.
Wells, A. (1997). Cognitive Therapy of Anxiety Disorders. A Practice Manual and Conceptual Guide (Chapter 6). Chichester: Wiley.
Woolfolk, R., & Allen, L. (2007). Treating Somatization: A Cognitive-Behavioural Approach. New York: Guilford Press.

Assessment Tools

Barsky, A., Cleary, P., Wyshak, G., Spitzer, R., Williams, J., & Klerman, G. (1992). A structured diagnostic interview for hypochondriasis. A
proposed criterion standard. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 180, 20–27.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Kellner, R. (1986). Somatization and Hypochondriasis. New York: Praeger. Contains the Illness Attitudes Scale.
Kellner, R. (1987). Abridged Manual of the Illness Attitude Scale. Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Mexica,
Albuquerque.
Longley, S. Meyers, K., Maxwell, R., & Boin, L. (2014). Assessment of hypochondriasis and health anxiety. In V. Starcevic & R. Noyes (Eds.),
Hypochondriasis and Health Anxiety: A Guide for Clinicians (pp. 65–84). New York: Oxford University Press.
Lucock, M., & Morley, S. (1996). The Health Anxiety Questionnaire. British Journal of Health Anxiety, 1, 137-150.
Pilowsky, I., & Spence, N. (1994). Manual for the Illness Behaviour Questionnaire (Third Edition). Adelaide, South Australia: The
Department of Psychiatry, University of Adelaide.


Salkovskis, P. M., Rimes, K. A., Warwick, H. M., & Clark, D. M. (2002). The Health Anxiety Inventory: Development and validation of scales
for the measurement of health anxiety and hypochondriasis. Psychological Medicine, 32, 843-853.
Further reading for Clients
Owens, K., & Antony, M. (2011). Overcoming Health Anxiety: Letting Go of Your Fear of Illness. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Segen, J., & Stauffer, J. (1998). The Patient's Guide to Medical Tests: Everything You Need to Know About the Tests Your Doctor Prescribes. New
York: Facts on File, Inc.
References
Abramowitz, J., & Braddock, A. (2008). Treatment of Health Anxiety and Hypochondriasis: A Biopsychosocial Approach. Cambridge, MA:
Hogrefe and Huber.
Abramowitz, J., & Braddock, A. (2011). Hypochondriasis and Health Anxiety: Advances in Psychotherapy-Evidence-Based Practice.
Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe.
Alberts, N. M., Sharpe, D., Kehler, M. D., & Hadjistavropoulos, H. D. (2011). Health anxiety: Comparison of the latent structure in medical
and non-medical samples. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25, 612-614.
Allen, L. A., & Woolfolk, R. L. (2010). Cognitive behavioural therapy for somatoform disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33,
579-593.
Allen, L. A., Woolfolk, R. L., Escobar, J. I., Gara, M. A., & Hamer, R. M. (2006). Cognitive-behavioural therapy for somatization disorder: A
randomized controlled trial. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166, 1512-1518.


American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-
IV-TR). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Barsky, A., Cleary, P., Wyshak, G., Spitzer, R., Williams, J., & Klerman, G. (1992). A structured diagnostic interview for hypochondriasis. A
proposed criterion standard. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 180, 20-27.
Beck, A. T. (1996). BDI-II. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., Epstein, N., Brown, G., & Steer, R. A. (1988). An inventory for measuring clinical anxiety: Psychometric properties. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 893-897.
Berrios, G. (2001). Hypochondriasis: History of the concept. In V. Starcevic & D. R. Lipsitt (Eds.), Hypochondriasis: Modern Perspectives on
an Ancient Malady (pp. 3-20). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bleichhardt, G., & Hiller, W. (2007). Hypochondriasis and health anxiety in the German population. British Journal of Health Psychology,
12(4), 511-523.
Bouman, T. K. (2002). A community-based psychoeducational group approach to hypochondriasis. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics,
71, 326-332.
Bouman, T. K. (2014). Psychological treatments for hypochondriasis: A narrative review. Current Psychiatry Reviews, 10, 58-69.
Bouman, T. K., & Buwalda, F. (2008). A psychoeducational approach to hypochondriasis: Background, content, and practice guidelines.
Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 15, 231-243.
Bouman, T. K., & Visser, S. (1998). Cognitive and behavioural treatment of hypochondriasis. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 67, 214-
221.


Bourgault-Fagnou, M., & Hadjistavropoulos, H. (2013). A randomized trial of two forms of cognitive behaviour therapy for an older adult
population with subclinical health anxiety, Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 42, 31-44.
Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., Wells, A., Fennell, M., Ludgate, J., ... Gelder, M. (1998). Two psychological treatments for
hypochondriasis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 218-225.
Creed, F., & Barsky, A. (2004). A systematic review of the epidemiology of somatisation disorder and hypochondriasis. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 56, 391-408.
Derogatis, L. R. (1975). SCL-90-R: Administration, Scoring and Procedures Manual II for the Revised Version and other Instruments of the
Psychopathology Rating Scale Series. Towson, MD: Clinical Psychometric Research.
Dugas, M. J., Ladouceur, R., Leger, E., Freeston, M. H., Langlois, F., Provencher, M. D., & Boisvert, J. M. (2003). Group cognitive-behavioural
therapy for generalized anxiety disorder: Treatment outcome and long-term follow-up. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71,
821-825.
Eilenberg, T., Kronstrand, L., Fink, P., & Frostholm, L. (2013). Acceptance and commitment group therapy for health anxiety-Results
from a pilot study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 27, 461-468.
El-Gabalawy, R., Mackenzie, C. S., Thibodeau, M. A., Asmundson, G.J.G., & Sareen, J. (2013). Health anxiety disorders in older adults:
Conceptualizing complex conditions in late life. Clinical Psychology Review, 33, 1096-1105.
Enns, M. W., Kjernisted, K., & Lander, M. (2001). Pharmacological management of hypochondriasis and related disorders. In G.
Asmundson, S. Taylor, B. Cox (Eds.), Health Anxiety: Clinical and Research Perspectives on Hypochondriasis and Related Conditions (pp. 193-
219). London: John Wiley.
Fallon, B., Petkova, E., Skritskaya, N., Sanchez-Lacay, A., Schneier, F., Vermes, D., ..., Liebowitz, M. (2008). A double-masked, placebo-
controlled study, of fluoxetine for hypochondriasis. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 28, 638-645.


Faravelli, C., Salvatori, S., Galassi, F., Aiazzi, L., Drei, C., & Cabras, P. (1997). Epidemiology of somatoform disorders: A community survey
in Florence. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 32, 24-29.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.
Foa, E. B., & Wilson, R. (2001). Stop Obsessing: How to Overcome Your Obsessions and Compulsions. New York: Bantam.
Furer, P., & Walker, J. R. (2005). Treatment of hypochondriasis with exposure. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 35, 251-267.
Furer, P., & Walker, J. R. (2008). Death anxiety: A cognitive-behavioural approach. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 22, 167-182.
Furer, P., Walker, J. R., Chartier, M. J., & Stein, M. B. (1997). Hypochondriacal concerns and somatization in panic disorder. Depression and
Anxiety, 6, 78-85.
Furer, P., Walker, J. R., & Stein, M. (2007). Treating Health Anxiety and Fear of Death: A Practitioner's Guide. New York: Springer.
Greeven, A., van Balkom, A., van der Leeden, R., Merkelbach, J., van den Heuvel, O., & Spinhoven, P. (2009). Cognitive behavioural
therapy versus paroxetine in the treatment of hypochondriasis: An 18-month naturalistic follow-up. Journal of Behaviour Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 40, 487-496.
Greeven, A., van Balkom, A., Visser, S., Merkelbach, J., van Rood, Y., van Dyck, R., & Spinhoven, P. (2007). Cognitive behaviour therapy and
paroxetine in the treatment of hypochondriasis: A randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 91-99.
Gureje, O., Ustun, T. B., & Simon, G. E. (1997). The syndrome of hypochondriasis: A cross-national study in primary care. Psychological
Medicine, 27, 1001-1010.
Hedman, E., Andersson, E., Andersson, G., Lindefors, N., Lekander, M., Rück, C., & Ljóttson, B(2013). Mediators in internet-based
cognitive behaviour therapy for severe health anxiety. PLoS One, 8(10), e77752.
Hedman, E., Andersson, E., Lindefors, N., Andersson, G., Rück, C., & Ljóttson, B. (2013). Cost-effectiveness and long-term effectiveness of
internet-based cognitive behaviour therapy for severe health anxiety. Psychological Medicine, 43, 363-374.


Hedman, E., Ljóttson, B., Andersson, E., Rück, C., Andersson, G., & Lindefors, N. (2010). Effectiveness and cost offset analysis of group
CBT for hypochondriasis delivered in a psychiatric setting: An open trial. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 39, 239-250.
Hunt, S., Wisocki, P., & Yanko, J. (2003). Worry and use of coping strategies among older and younger adults. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
17,547-560.
Jacobi, F., Wittchen, H-U., Holting, C., Hofler, M., Pfister, H., Muller, N., & Lieb, R. (2004). Prevalence, co-morbidity and correlates
of mental disorders in the general population: Results from the German health interview examination survey (GHS). Psychological
Medicine, 34, 1-15.
Jones, S. L., Hadjistavropoulos, H. D., & Gullickson, K. (2014). Understanding health anxiety following breast cancer diagnosis.
Psychology, Health, and Medicine, 19, 525-535.
Kellner, R. (1986). Somatization and Hypochondriasis. Westport, CT: Praeger-Greenwood.
Kellner, R. (1987). Hypochondriasis and somatization. Journal of the American Medical Association, 258, 2718-2722.
Kroenke, K. (2007). Efficacy of treatment for somatoform disorders: A review of randomized controlled trials. Psychosomatic Medicine,
69,881-888.
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R., deGruy, F., Hahn, S., Linzer, M., Williams, J., ..., Davies, M. (1997). Multisomatoform disorder. An alternative to
undifferentiated somatoform disorder for the somatizing patient in primary care. Archives of General Psychiatry, 54, 352-358.
Kübler-Ross, E. (Ed.). (1975). Death: The Final Stage of Growth. New York: Touchstone.
Ladouceur, R., Dugas, M. J., Freeston, M. H., Leger, E., Gagnon, F., & Thibodeau, N. (2000). Efficacy of a cognitive-behavioural treatment
for generalized anxiety disorder: Evaluation in a controlled clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 957-964.
Longley, S., Broman-Fulks, J., Calamari, J., Noyes, R., Wade, M., & Orlando, C. (2010). A taxometric study of hypochondriasis symptoms.
Behaviour Therapy, 41, 505-514.


Longley, S., Meyers, K., Maxwell, R., & Boin, L. (2014). Assessment of hypochondriasis and health anxiety. In V. Starcevic & R. Noyes
(Eds.), Hypochondriasis and Health Anxiety: A Guide for Clinicians (pp. 65-84). New York: Oxford University Press.
Longley, S. L., Watson, D., & Noyes, R. (2005). Assessment of the hypochondriasis domain: The Multidimensional Inventory of
Hypochondriacal Traits (MIHT). Psychological Assessment, 17, 3-14.
Looper, K. J., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2002). Behavioural medicine approaches to somatoform disorders. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 70, 810-827.
Lovas, D. A., & Barsky, A. J. (2010). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for hypochondriasis, or severe health anxiety: A pilot study.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24, 9311-935.
Lucock, M. P., & Morley, S. (1996). The Health Anxiety Questionnaire. British Journal of Health Psychology, 1, 137-150.
Margolis, S. (Ed.). (2001). The Johns Hopkins Consumer Guide to Medical Tests. Baltimore, MD: Rebus Inc.
Martin, A., & Jacobi, F. (2006). Features of hypochondriasis and illness worry in the general population in Germany. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 68, 770-777.
McLean, P. D., Whittal, M. L., Thordarson, D. S., Taylor, S., Sochting, I., Koch, W. J., ... Anderson, K. W. (2001). Cognitive versus behaviour
therapy in the group treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 205-214.
McManus, F., Surawy, C., Muse, K., Vasquez-Montes, M., & Williams, J. M. (2012). A randomized trial of mindfulness-based cognitive
therapy versus unrestricted services for health anxiety (hypochondriasis). Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 5, 817-828.
Melville, D. I. (1987). Descriptive clinical research and medically unexplained physical symptoms. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 31,
359-365.
Muller, J., Wentzel, I., Koen, L., Niehaus, D., Seedat, S., & Stein, D. (2008). Escitalopram in the treatment of multisomatoform disorder: a
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. International Clinical Psychopharmacology, 23, 43-48.
Nuland, S. (1994). How We Die. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.


Olatunji, B., Kauffman, B., Meltzer, S., Davis, M., Smits, J., & Powers, M. (2014). Cognitive-behavioural therapy for hypochondriasis/health
anxiety: A meta-analysis of treatment outcome and moderators. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 58, 65-74.
Owens, K., & Antony, M. (2011). Overcoming Health Anxiety: Letting Go of Your Fear of Illness. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Pilowsky, I. (1967). Dimensions of hypochondriasis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 113, 89-93.
Rief, W., Hessel, A., & Braehler, E. (2001). Somatization symptoms and hypochondriacal features in the general population.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 63, 595-602.
Salkovskis, P. M. (1989). Somatic problems. In H. Hawton, P. M. Salkovskis, J. Kirk, D. M. Clark (Eds.), Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for
Psychiatric Problems: A Practical Guide (pp. 235-276). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Salkovskis, P. M., Rimes, K. A., Warwick, H. M., & Clark, D. M. (2002). The Health Anxiety Inventory: Development and validation of scales
for the measurement of health anxiety and hypochondriasis. Psychological Medicine, 32, 843-853.
Segen, J., & Stauffer, J. (1998). The Patient's Guide to Medical Tests: Everything You Need to Know About the Tests Your Doctor Prescribes. New
York: Facts on File, Inc.
Sharpe, M., Peveler, R., & Mayou, R. (1992). The psychological treatment of patients with functional somatic symptoms: A practical
guide. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 36, 515-529.
Somashekar, B., Jainer, A., & Wuntakal, B. (2013). Psychopharmacotherapy of somatic symptoms disorders. International Review of
Psychiatry, 25, 107-115.
Speckens, A. E., van Hemert, A. M., Spinhoven, P., Hawton, K. E., Bolk, J. H., & Rooijmans, H. G. (1995). Cognitive behavioural therapy for
medically unexplained physical symptoms: A randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 311, 1328-1332.
Stewart, S. H., & Watt, M. C. (2001). Assessment of health anxiety. In G. Asmundson, S. Taylor, B. Cox (Eds.), Health Anxiety: Clinical and
Research Perspectives on Hypochondriasis and Related Conditions (pp. 95-131). London: John Wiley.
Stein, D. J. (2012). Hypochondriasis in ICD-11. World Psychiatry, 11 (Suppl. 1), 100-104.


Sunderland, M., Newby, J. M., & Andrews, G. (2013). Health anxiety in Australia: Prevalence, comorbidity, disability and service use. The
British Journal of Psychiatry, 202, 56-61.
Taylor, S., & Asmundson, G.J.G. (2004). Treating Health Anxiety: A Cognitive-Behavioural Approach. New York: The Guilford Press.
Tyrer, H. (2013). Tackling Health Anxiety: A CBT Handbook. London: RCPsych Publications.
Tyrer, P., Cooper, S., Tyrer, H., Salkovskis, P., Crawford, M., Green, J., ... Barrett, B. (2011). CHAMP: Cognitive behaviour therapy for health
anxiety in medical patients, a randomised controlled trial. BMC Psychiatry, 11. Retrieved from http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471–
244X/11/99
Visser, S., & Bouman, T. K. (2001). The treatment of hypochondriasis: Exposure plus response prevention vs. cognitive therapy. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 39, 423-442.
Walker, J. R., & Furer, P. (2008). Interoceptive exposure in the treatment of health anxiety and hypochondriasis. Journal of Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 22, 367-380.
Wang, P., Demler, O., Olfson, M., Pincus, H., Wells, K., & Kessler, R. (2006). Changing profiles of service sectors used for mental health care
in the United States. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 1187-1198.
Warwick, H.M.C., Clark, D. M., Cobb, A. M., & Salkovskis, P. M. (1996). A controlled trial of cognitive-behavioural treatment of
hypochondriasis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 169, 189-195.
Warwick, H M.C., & Marks, I. M. (1988). Behavioural treatment of illness phobia and hypochondriasis: A pilot study of 17 cases. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 239-241.
Warwick, H.M.C., & Salkovskis, P. M. (2001). Cognitive-behavioural treatment of hypochondriasis. In V. Starcevic & D. R. Lipsitt (Eds.),
Hypochondriasis: Modern Perspectives on an Ancient Malady (pp. 314-328). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Woolfolk, R., & Allen, L. (2007). Treating Somatization: A Cognitive-Behavioural Approach. New York: Guilford Press.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1991). Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.


World Health Organization (WHO). (1993). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.


Chapter 20 Chronic Pain
Dennis C. Turk and Tasha B. Murphy
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-20
Case Study
Mary was a 64-year-old married woman and mother of three adult children. She presented to the clinic following referral from an
orthopaedist who had treated her for several years. He did not recommend any further medical treatment and encouraged Mary to exercise,
particularly to swim to strengthen her back muscles, and made a referral for an assessment by a psychologist.
Mary presented as a pleasant and friendly woman. Describing chronic pain in her lower back over the previous 10 years, she was at times
tearful and admitted to low mood and occasional passive suicidal ideation. Due to her strong religious faith, she said she would never harm
herself, but looking to the future, she despaired at the thought of never getting respite from the pain. The pain began initially during her
second pregnancy (when she was aged 24) and had flared up intermittently during the next 30 years. In the last 10 years, it never remitted,
being at best a dull ache but at worst a severe and shooting pain that sent Mary to her bed to rest on hot pads. She explained that exercising
was impossible, as it always involved some slight pulling or twisting that exacerbated her pain. Mary also complained of intermittent pain

in her head, with tingling pain and occasional dizziness. This had been extensively assessed and no physical cause established. She was
prescribed some analgesics for this pain, which she would take, go to bed with the curtains drawn and wait for the pain to pass. Mary
desperately wanted relief and felt hurt about the referral for psychological assessment. She saw it as a sign that her physician did not believe
her accounts of her pain, had lost interest in helping her, and was unfairly saying that her pain was "all in her head."
Mary's husband had retired 10 years previously from running his own successful business, a business that kept him extremely busy
throughout his working life. He had looked forward to spending his retirement travelling with Mary or sailing with her at his local club. He
was supportive, if demoralised, by her frequent episodes of pain, particularly if such pain disrupted holidays or planned social events. In fact,
due to the difficulties of Mary being in pain on previous holidays, the couple no longer planned any trips, nor did Mary go sailing with him
anymore. He offered her extensive practical support on a daily basis, acting as a porter for her as Mary would not lift shopping bags, chairs or
even a coffee pot for fear of worsening her pain. He often felt guilty about going sailing while leaving her at home in pain, and consequently
did not go out as often as he planned.
Mary had given up her job as an accounts manager after the birth of her first child. She described her adult life as being devoted to
her children, with whom she had good relationships and whom she missed a great deal since they left home. They in turn noticed that
conversations with Mary were increasingly dominated by her accounts of her most recent pains and frustrations. They were sympathetic
and concerned, and when she was in bed with pain made a special effort to call and visit her more. Mary valued contact with her children. She
was particularly frustrated that her preparations for family gatherings invariably led to bouts of acute pain so that her own and the family's
enjoyment of such events was reduced. While Mary had a wide circle of friends, she was gradually less involved with them as she stopped
sailing or attending social outings. Preoccupied by her pain, she was less and less interested in others' lives or pursuits. As her children
became more involved with building their careers and relationships, her friends called on her less and less, and she gave up more activities,
Mary felt more alone with her pain, more depressed and hopeless.


Clinical Features of Chronic Pain
Pain is the most frequent reason for physician consultation in the US (Hing et al., 2005) with nearly one-half of those who seek treatment
reporting that their primary symptom is pain. Examination of the largest categories of chronic pain syndromes reveals that the vast
majority have symptoms that are unrelated to identifiable pathology but rather symptoms present at specific body locations such as low
back pain, headache, nonspecific neck pain, and osteoarthritis of the knee (e.g. Carragee, 2005; Finan et al., 2013). The National Health
Interview Survey of 2007 reported that 27,364,000 (12.3%) respondents experienced migraine or severe headaches, 29,019,000 (12.8%)
had neck pain, 57,070,000 (25.4%) had pain in the lower back, and 9,062,000 (4%) had pain in the face or jaw in the 3 months preceding the
interview (Pleis & Lucas, 2009).
Although advanced, sophisticated treatments and drugs have been developed, the majority of available treatments do not cure persistent
pain, and fewer than 30% of patients with chronic pain experience 50% reductions in intensity (Moore et al., 2013). Even combinations
of analgesic drugs do not always make significant incremental benefits. For example, Gilron et al. (2005) demonstrated only modest
incremental benefits of combining morphine and gabapentin over either alone in treating neuropathic pain. A Cochrane Review of the
combination of opioids and NSAIDS for cancer pain also reported inconsistent results with only slight advantages for the combination. The
results for non-pharmacological treatments (e.g. surgery, nerve blocks, epidural steroids, rehabilitation) are not much better (Turk, Wilson,
& Cahana, 2011). Thus, significant pain persists as ineffective treatments, unmet expectations, pessimism, anger, disability, isolation, and
demoralisation characterise the transition from acute to chronic pain.
Diagnostic criteria for pain and somatic symptom disorders from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fifth Edition (DSM-5, APA, 2013)
and from the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Edition (ICD-10, WHO, 1992) are included in Table 20.1. Somatic symptom
disorder with predominant pain, according to the DSM-5, involves somatic, persistent (typically more than 6 months) symptoms that


predominantly involve pain that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life. Excessive thoughts, feelings or behaviours
related to the symptoms involve disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the seriousness of one's symptoms, persistently high level
of anxiety about symptoms and/or excessive time and energy devoted to symptom concerns.
Despite the soaring cost of treating people with chronic pain, relief for many pain sufferers remains elusive and total elimination of pain is
rare, hence the phrase chronic pain. Although there have been phenomenal advances in the knowledge of sensory physiology, anatomy and
biochemistry, along with the development of potent analgesic medications and other innovative medical and surgical interventions, pain
and disability as problems have not been eliminated for a significant portion of the population. Nevertheless, there has been progress in the
treatment of chronic pain from the biopsychosocial perspective, which has helped people cope with their pain experience when it cannot be
eliminated. The purpose of this chapter, then, is to provide information about conceptual models, assessment and intervention strategies for
people with chronic pain with an emphasis on the role of psychological factors and treatment that addresses psychosocial and behavioural
contributors to the pain experience.
Table 20.1 Diagnostic Criteria for Pain and Somatic Symptom Disorders
DSM-5
ICD 10
Somatic Symptom Disorder
A. One or more somatic symptoms that are distressing
or result in significant disruption of daily life.
Persistent Somatoform Pain Disorder
1. The predominant complaint is of persistent, severe, and distressing
pain, which cannot be explained fully by a physiological process or a
physical disorder. Pain occurs in association with emotional conflict

B. Excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviours related to
the somatic symptoms or associated health concerns
as manifested by at least one of the following:
1. Disproportionate and persistent thoughts about
the seriousness of one's symptoms.
2. Persistently high level of anxiety about health or
symptoms.
3. Excessive time and energy devoted to these
symptoms or health concerns.
C. Although any one somatic symptom may not
be continuously present, the state of being
symptomatic is persistent (typically more than 6
months).
Specify if:
1. With predominant pain (previously pain disorder):
This specifier is for individuals whose somatic
symptoms predominantly involve pain.
Specify if:
or psychosocial problems that are sufficient to allow the conclusion
that they are the main causative influences. The result is usually a
marked increase in support and attention, either personal or medical.
2. Pain presumed to be of psychogenic origin occurring during the
course of depressive disorder or schizophrenia should not be included
here. Pain due to known or inferred psychophysiological mechanisms
such as muscle tension pain or migraine, but still believed to have a
psychogenic cause, should be coded by the use of F54 (psychological
or behavioural factors associated with disorders or diseases classified
elsewhere) plus an additional code from elsewhere in ICD-10 (e.g.
migraine, G43-).
3. Includes: psychalgia
4. Psychogenic backache or headache
5. Somatoform pain disorder.

1. Persistent: A persistent course is characterized by
severe symptoms, marked impairment, and long
duration (more than 6 months).
Specify current severity:
1. Mild: Only one of the symptoms specified in
Criterion B is fulfilled.
2. Moderate: Two or more of the symptoms specified in
Criterion B are fulfilled.
3. Severe: Two or more of the symptoms specified
in Criterion B are fulfilled, plus there are multiple
somatic complaints (or one very severe somatic
symptom).
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and adapted from ICD-10 (WHO, 1992, pp. 168-169).


Classification of Pain
Acute Pain
From our earliest experiences, we become familiar with the pain of a cut, sunburn or bruised knee. In these instances, the pain is acute.
That is, it is selflimiting and will remit on its own and with minor self-care, without the need of treatment by a health care professional, in
a reasonably short period of time (usually hours, days or a few weeks). Rarely are there any long-term consequences following acute pain
episodes.
In acute pain, nociception (activation of sensory conduction in nerve fibres that transmit information about tissue damage from the
periphery to brain via the spinal cord) acts as a warning signal directing concentration and demanding attention in order to prevent further
damage and to expedite the healing process. Therefore, they are reflective. For example, when we place our hands on a hot stove, we quickly
remove it to avoid tissue being damaged. Pain also signals that an injury or disease state is present, as in the case of a broken leg or inflamed
appendix. In these instances, pain serves an important, protective function, informing us that steps should be taken to prevent additional
problems and, if necessary, seek medical attention.
Recurrent Acute Pain
There are a number of pain disorders (e.g. migraine, rheumatoid arthritis, tic douloureux) that are characterised by painful episodes that
alternate with pain-free periods, often in an unpredictable fashion. For example, migraine may last for several hours and then remit even
without any treatment or the episode might be prevented or aborted with pharmacological agents. People with migraines may be headache-
free for days or weeks only to have another episode. Migraine and conditions with similar episodic characteristics may be viewed as recurrent

acute pain. In the case of recurrent acute pain, the role of pain is unclear, as there are rarely any protective actions that can be taken. In
contrast to acute pain, in both recurrent acute pain and, as we shall see, chronic pain, the symptom may serve no useful purpose.
Chronic Pain
Chronic pain persists and can last for months, years, and even decades beyond any period for which healing of the initial injury might be
expected. As is the case in recurrent acute pain, in chronic pain syndromes (e.g. osteoarthritis, fibromyalgia syndrome) the pain does not
appear to have any obvious useful function. Pain that is chronic or recurrent impacts emotional, social, economic and physical functioning
and thus significantly compromises overall health-related quality of life. If it persists it may become a disease entity itself, and can actually
produce physical harm by suppressing the immune system (Liebeskind, 1991).
Oftentimes, the underlying cause for an individual's chronic pain cannot be determined using currently available imaging and
laboratory methods. There have been some suggestions regarding alterations within the nervous system where prolonged pain leads to
neurophysiological changes and increased sensitivity within the central nervous system (CNS) that perpetuate the experience of pain even
when the initial cause has resolved, commonly referred to as central sensitisation (Woolf, 2007). To complicate matters, the diagnosis and
treatment of chronic pain is often based solely on a self-report of pain. An individual's perception of pain and the presence of behaviours
connoting pain ("pain behaviours"), however, are not necessarily proportional to the amount of tissue pathology or the pain and disability
reported. For example, for some people with traumatic injuries such as meniscal tears, laboratory values and imaging studies reveal objective
pathology that might contribute to reports of severe pain. However, many other individuals who show similar signs of disease activity do not
report persistent, severe symptoms (Englund et al., 2008) or impact on their functioning (White et al., 2013). In this case it is unclear why
two people with the same physical findings respond so differently; one reports being incapacitated by pain whereas the other reports no pain
whatsoever. Obviously, something other than physical pathology is influencing the reports of pain.


Epidemiology of Chronic Pain
Precise estimates of the prevalence of chronic pain syndromes are difficult to ascertain. In the US, between 13% and 38% of patients treated
in primary care report persistent pain (Riskowski, 2014; Smith et al., 2004), depending on how it is defined and the country where the survey
was conducted. The Institute of Medicine report on Pain in America (Pizzo et al., 2011) estimated that over 100 million non-institutionalised
adults in America experience persistent pain. In a somewhat earlier estimate, the National Centre for Health Statistics (2006) estimated
that about 25% of the American population has chronic or recurrent pain, and 40% state that the pain has a moderate or severe degrading
impact on their lives. In a recent study of population health in the US, low back pain was the 3rd, neck pain the 11th, osteoarthritis 25th, and
migraine 28th most frequent source of disability in adjusted life-years (Murray et al., 2013). It is not surprising, then, that the 2010 Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act (Section 4305) established a mandate "to increase the recognition of pain as a significant public health
problem in the United States."
The problem of pain is not unique to the US: it also affects an estimated 37-41% of persons worldwide (Tsang et al., 2008). Moreover, the
prevalence increases with adult age (Johannes et al., 2011), and the population is aging. Nor is the problem unique to adults. Chronic or
recurrent pain is a common occurrence among children and adolescents, affecting as much as 25% of the paediatric population (Perquin et
al., 2000).
The first-line treatment for most pain is medication. Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data
indicated that approximately 76% of American adults consumed non-prescription analgesic medication in the month prior to the survey
(Paulose-Ram et al., 2003). According to a nationally representative survey of US adults, the 1-week prevalence of use of acetaminophen
is 23%, aspirin 17%, and over-the-counter (OTC) non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) 17%, with the primary reason being


headache and musculoskeletal pain (Kaufman et al., 2002). In the US, $2.6 billion was spent on non-prescription analgesics alone in the year
ending March 25, 2007 (Anon, 2007).
Prescription analgesics incur an even greater cost: the estimate for prescription analgesics is $27 billion (Melnikova, 2010). Perhaps the
most commonly prescribed analgesic class is opioids. Over 201.9 million opioid prescriptions alone were dispensed in the US in 2009
(Volkow et al., 2011). In a given week, over 10 million Americans are taking opioids, and 4.3 million (2% of adult population) are taking them
regularly (i.e. at least 5 days per week for at least 4 weeks) (Kelly et al., 2008). The opioid analgesic market in the US is estimated to bring in
$10 billion annually and $50 billion worldwide (Melnikova, 2010).
Beyond the health care costs of medication, a range of surgical, other interventional treatments (nerve blocks, epidural steroids), and other
nonpharmacological treatments (e.g. physical therapy, rehabilitation), complementary approaches (e.g. acupuncture, spinal manipulation)
and hospitalisation are used in the quest to adequately control pain. These interventions add significantly to the expenditures of analgesic
medications. Unfortunately, the currently available medical, pharmacological and surgical treatments for patients with chronic and acute
recurrent pain are inadequate and only moderately effective at best (e.g. Turk, Wilson, & Cahana, 2011).
In addition to the costs of medication and other interventions, the indirect costs related to chronic pain are astronomical, including lost
time at work, lost tax revenue, legal services, and disability compensation. The costs of pain in the US are estimated to exceed $560 billion
annually (Pizzo et al., 2011).
Theories of Chronic Pain
In the remainder of this chapter we will focus on chronic pain. However, much of our discussion is also relevant for acute recurrent pain. A
number of models have been postulated to conceptualise the chronic pain experience. Single factor models (including the biomedical model,
psychogenic model, motivational model, and behavioural models) focus on a particular cause of the symptoms reported. Multidimensional


models (gate control theory and the biopsychosocial model) emphasise the contributions of a range of factors that influence a person's
experiences and reports of pain.
Single-Factor Models of Chronic Pain
Biomedical Model of Chronic Pain
The traditional biomedical view of pain assumes that reports of pain must be related, in a proportionate manner, with a specific physical
cause. As a consequence, the extent of pain should be directly associated with the amount of detectable neurophysiological perturbations.
Health care providers often undertake Herculean efforts (frequently at great expense) attempting to establish the specific link between
tissue damage and the severity of pain. The expectation is that once the physical cause has been identified, appropriate treatment will
follow. Treatment will then focus on eliminating the putative cause(s) of the pain, or chemically (e.g. medication, regional anaesthesia,
implantable drug delivery systems), surgically (e.g. laminectomy), or electrically (e.g. transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, spinal
cord stimulation) disrupting the pain pathways in the nervous system. Relying exclusively on biomedical treatments, however, does not
always eliminate pain symptoms, as many of these interventions do not have evidence supporting their efficacy (Chan & Peng, 2011; Deyo
& Mirza, 2009).
There are several perplexing features of chronic pain that do not fit neatly within the traditional biomedical model, with its suggestion
of an isomorphic relationship between pathology and symptoms. In addition to the observation of individual differences in responding
to the same physical pathology noted, a particular conundrum is the fact that pain may be reported even in the absence of identified
pathological process. It is estimated that one-third to one-half of all visits to primary care physicians are prompted by symptoms for which
no biomedical causes can be detected (Kroenke & Mangelsdorff, 1989). For example, in 80% to 85% of the cases, the cause of back pain is
unknown (Deyo, 1986). Conversely, imaging studies using computed tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have

observed the presence of significant pathology in up to 35% of asymptomatic people (e.g. Carragee, 2005; M. C. Jensen et al., 1994). Similarly,
asymptomatic individuals may have significant degrees of degeneration, and more importantly, a similar prevalence of disk herniation
that is comparable to symptomatic people (Boos et al., 1995), yet report no pain. Thus, some people report severe pain with *no* identifiable
pathology, whereas others with demonstrable pathology may not complain of pain. Such observations suggest that the biomedical model
may be insufficient to describe chronic pain.
Psychogenic Model of Chronic pain
As is frequently the case in medicine, when physical explanations seem inadequate or when the results of treatment are inconsistent, reports
of pain are attributed to a psychological aetiology (and thus are "psychogenic"). Assessment based on the psychogenic perspective is directed
towards identifying the psychopathological tendencies or personality factors that instigate and maintain the reported pain. Traditional
psychological measures such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI; Greene, 2010) and the Symptom Checklist-90
(SCL-90; Derogatis, 1983) are commonly used to evaluate chronic pain sufferers (Piotrowski, 2007). Elevated patterns of scores on such
instruments are considered to support the notion of psychogenic pain, despite the fact that these instruments were not standardised on
medical samples. This is a significant problem since items related to physical symptoms such as the presence of pain in the back of the neck,
the ability to work, feelings of weakness, and beliefs regarding health status in comparison with friends can be affected by disease status
and medication, resulting in misleading elevations in scores. It is assumed that reports of pain will cease once the psychogenic mechanisms
are resolved. Treatment is geared towards providing "insight" into the underlying maladaptive psychological contributors (e.g. Beutler et al.,
1986; Grzesiak et al., 1996).
Empirical evidence supporting the psychogenic view is scarce. A number of people with chronic pain do not exhibit significant
psychopathology. Furthermore, insight-oriented psychotherapy has not been shown to be effective in reducing symptoms for the majority
of individuals with chronic pain (Turk, Swanson, & Tunks, 2008). Studies suggest that the emotional distress observed in individuals with


chronic pain more typically occurs in response to the persistence of pain and not as a causal agent (e.g. Okifuji et al., 2000; Rudy et al., 1988)
and may resolve once pain is adequately treated (Wallis et al., 1997). The psychogenic model has thus come under scrutiny, and may be
flawed in its view of chronic pain.
Motivational Model of Chronic Pain
The motivational model suggests that reports of pain in the absence of, or in excess of physical pathology are attributed to the desire of
the individual presenting with persistent pain to obtain some benefit such as attention, time off from undesirable activities, or financial
compensation - secondary gains. In contrast to the psychogenic model, in the motivational view, a high degree of discrepancy between what
the individual says about his or her pain and disability and performance on a more objective assessment of physical functioning are taken as
evidence that the person is consciously exaggerating or fabricating his or her symptoms to obtain a desired outcome (e.g. malingering).
Assessment of people using the motivational model focuses on identifying discrepancies between what they say they are capable of doing
and what they actually can do, through repeated performance of functional capacity testing, or through surveillance. Thus, an individual
who states that he cannot lift weights over 10 lbs. and who refuses to attempt to lift during a functional capacity evaluation might be
videotaped lifting groceries out of a car. The report of the inability to lift, in the light of the observation of lifting groceries, is taken as proof
of dissimulation, even though these inconsistencies fail to consider the limited ability of people to accurately estimate the capacity and the
refusal to perform associated with fear of injury, reinjury, or exacerbation of pain (e.g. Lenthem et al., 1983; Vlaeyen et al., 1995).
The treatment of pain from the motivational perspective is simple: denial of disability payments, with the assumption that this will lead
inevitably to resolution of the symptoms. Although this view is prevalent, especially among third-party payers, there is little evidence of
dramatic cure of pain following denial of disability (Mendelson, 1982).


Behavioural Conceptualisations of Chronic Pain
There are three major principles of learning that contribute to our understanding of the acquisition of adaptive as well as dysfunctional
behaviours associated with pain. These principles are well known in the general psychology literature and are applicable in the context
chronic pain.
Classical (Respondent) Conditioning
In the classical or respondent conditioning model, if a nociceptive stimulus is repeatedly paired with a neutral stimulus, the neutral stimulus
will come to elicit a pain response. For example, an individual who received a painful treatment from a physical therapist (PT) may become
conditioned to experience a negative emotional response to the presence of the PT, to the treatment room, and to any stimulus associated
with nociceptive stimuli. The negative emotional reaction may lead to tensing of muscles and this may in turn exacerbate pain, thereby
reinforcing the association between the presence of the PT and pain.
Once a pain problem persists, fear of physical activities that the individual expects to result in pain may develop and motivate avoidance of
activity (van den Berg-Emons et al., 2007; Vlaeyen & Linton, 2012). Avoidance of pain is a powerful rationale for reduction of activity, where
muscle soreness associated with exercise functions as a justification for further avoidance. Although it may be useful to reduce movement
in the acute stage, limitation of activities can be chronically maintained not only by pain but also by anticipatory fear that has been acquired
through the mechanism of classical conditioning. In this way, it is the anticipation that motivates a conscious decision to avoid specific
behaviours, situations or stimuli.
In chronic pain, many activities that were neutral or even pleasurable may come to elicit or exacerbate pain and are thus experienced as
aversive and actively avoided. Over time, a growing number of stimuli (e.g. activities, exercises) may be expected to elicit or exacerbate pain
and will be avoided (a process known as stimulus generalisation). Thus, the anticipatory fear of pain and restriction of activity, and not just

the actual nociception, may contribute to disability. Anticipatory fear can also elicit physiological reactivity that may aggravate pain. Thus,
conditioning may directly increase nociceptive stimulation and pain.
So long as activity avoidance succeeds in preventing pain initiation or exacerbation, the conviction that people with pain hold that they
remain inactive is difficult to modify. Treatment of pain from the classical conditioning model includes repeatedly engaging in behaviour
- exposure - that produces progressively less pain than was predicted (corrective feedback), which is then followed by reductions in
anticipatory fear and anxiety associated with the activity (Boersma et al., 2004; de Jong et al., 2005; Leeuw et al., 2008; Vlaeyen et al., 2002).
Such transformations add support to the importance of quota-based physical exercise programmes, with progressively increasing activity
levels despite fear of injury and discomfort associated with use of deconditioned muscles (Dolce et al., 1986; Fordyce, 1976).
Operant Conditioning - Contingencies of Reinforcement
A new era in thinking about pain began in 1973 with Fordyce's extension of operant conditioning to chronic pain (Fordyce, 1976; Fordyce
et al., 1973). This view proposes that acute pain behaviours (such as avoidance of activity to protect a painful area from additional pain)
may come under the control of external contingencies of reinforcement (responses increase or decrease as a function of their reinforcing
consequences) and thus develop into a chronic pain problem. Overt pain behaviours include verbal reports, paralinguistic vocalisations
(e.g. sighs, moans), motor activity, facial expressions, body postures and gesturing (e.g. limping, rubbing a painful body part, grimacing),
functional limitations (reclining for extensive periods of time, inactivity), and behaviours designed to reduce pain (e.g. taking medication,
use of the health care system). These behaviours may be positively reinforced directly (e.g. attention from a spouse or health care
provider, monetary compensation, avoidance of undesirable activity). Pain behaviours may also be maintained by the escape from noxious
stimulation by the use of drugs or rest, or the avoidance of undesirable activities such as work. In addition, "well behaviours" (e.g. activity,
working) may not be positively reinforcing and the more rewarding pain behaviours may, therefore, be maintained.


We can consider an example to illustrate the role of operant conditioning. When a person with back pain has a pain flare-up, she may lie
down and hold her back. Her husband may observe her behaviour and infer that she is experiencing pain. He may respond by offering to rub
her back. This response may positively reward the woman and her pain behaviours (i.e. lying down) may be repeated even in the absence of
pain. The husband might also reinforce her pain behaviours by permitting her to avoid undesirable activities (such as suggesting they cancel
evening plans, which she may have preferred to avoid anyway). In these situations, her husband providing extra attention and comfort and
the opportunity to avoid an undesirable social obligation rewards and maintains her pain behaviours by the learned consequences.
Table 20.2 summarises the mechanisms and consequences involved in operant conditioning. The operant learning paradigm does not
uncover the aetiology of pain but focuses primarily on the maintenance of pain behaviours and deficiency in well behaviours. Adjustment of
reinforcement schedules will likely modify the probability of recurrence of pain behaviours and well behaviours.
It is important to emphasise that pain sufferers do not necessarily intentionally communicate pain to obtain attention or avoid
undesirable activities. It is more likely the result of a gradual process of the shaping of behaviour that neither the pain sufferer nor her
significant others recognise. Thus, a person's response to life stressors as well as how others respond to the pain sufferer can influence the
experience of pain in many ways, but are not the cause of the pain condition (Flor & Turk, 2011).
Treatments that incorporate operant principles are efficacious for reducing pain, disability, and psychological dysfunction (Eccleston,
Palermo et al., 2009; Henschke et al., 2010). Interventions might include teaching those experiencing pain and their families about the
operant model, encouraging significant others to reinforce wellness behaviours and ignore pain behaviours and, in more serious cases,
removing the person with pain from their current environment and placing him/her in an inpatient or outpatient setting to allow for greater
control over social reinforcers (Flor & Turk, 2011; Gatchel et al., 2014; Jensen & Turk, 2014). Such interventions shift the attention away
from pain behaviours and focus instead on life goals and functioning.


Table 20.2 Consequences of Operant Conditioning
Schedule
Consequences
Probability of the behaviour recurring
Positive reinforcement
Reward the behaviour
More likely
Negative reinforcement
Prevent or withdraw, avoidance
More likely
Punishment
With negative emotions and much attention
More likely
Punishment
With little attention, ignoring the behaviour
Less likely
Neglect
Prevent or withdraw positive results
Less likely
Social Learning Processes
From this perspective the acquisition of pain behaviours may occur not only from direct reinforcement, but also by means of observational
learning and modelling processes (Goubert et al., 2011). That is, people can acquire behavioural responses that were not previously in their
repertoire by the observation of others, particularly those whom they view as being similar to themselves.
Children, for example, develop attitudes about health and health care, and the perception and interpretation of symptoms and
physiological processes from their parents and others they confront in their social environment. They learn how others respond to injury
and disease and thus may be more or less likely to ignore or over-respond to symptoms they experience based on behaviours modelled in
childhood. For example, children of people with chronic pain make more pain-related responses during stressful times or exhibit greater

illness behaviours (e.g. complaining, days absent, visit to school nurse) than children of healthy parents based on what they observed and
learned at home (Richard, 1988).
Expectancies and actual behavioural responses to nociceptive stimulation are based, at least partially, on prior social learning history.
Models can influence the expression, localisation, and methods of coping with pain (Craig, 1986). Even physiological responses may be
conditioned during observation of others in pain (Vaughan & Lanzetta, 1980). Complicating the issue is that how people interpret, respond
to, and cope with illness is largely culturally determined. This may contribute to the marked variability in response to objectively similar
degrees of physical pathology noted by health care providers.
Multidimensional Models of Chronic Pain
While the biomedical, psychogenic, motivational and behavioural views are single-factor conceptualisations that ascribe pain to either
physical or psychological factors, it may be that both physical and psychological components interact to create and influence the experience
of pain. Thus, several efforts have been made to integrate physical, psychosocial and behavioural factors within multidimensional models.
Beginning in the late 1960s, psychologists began applying psychological principles to help understand and treat people with chronic pain.
Supported by an expanding body of research demonstrating the influence of psychosocial factors on pain perception and its impact (Boothby
et al., 1999; Carragee et al., 2005; Jarvik et al., 2005), there was a shift from viewing chronic pain from a purely biomedical perspective to
understanding it as having biological, psychological, social and economic effects and causes - that is, from a biopsychosocial perspective (Flor
& Turk, 2011; Gatchel et al., 2007).
Gate Control Theory
The first attempt to develop an integrative model designed to address the problems created by one-dimensional models and to integrate
physiological and psychological factors was the gate control theory (GCT) proposed by Melzack and Wall (1965) and presented in Figure 20.1.

Perhaps the most important contribution of the GCT is the way it changed thinking about pain perception. In this model, Melzack and Wall postulated that three systems were related to the processing of nociceptive stimulation - sensory-discriminative, motivational-affective and cognitive-evaluative – all of which contribute to the subjective experience of pain. Melzack and Wall emphasised the CNS mechanisms and provided a physiological basis for the role of psychological factors in chronic pain.
Gate control system
A-delta
and
C-Fiber
A-beta
+
SG*
-
+
T**
-
* Gate cell in the substantia gelatinosa. ** T = transmission cells

Figure 20.1 Gate Control Model of Pain

From the GCT perspective, the experience of pain consists of an ongoing sequence of activities, largely reflexive in nature at the outset,
but modifiable even in the earliest stages by a variety of excitatory and inhibitory influences (physiological and psychological), and by
the integration of ascending and descending nervous system activity. The process results in overt expressions communicating pain and
strategies by the person to terminate the pain. In addition, considerable potential for shaping the pain experience is implied because the GCT
invokes continuous interaction of multiple systems (sensory-physiological, affect, cognition and, ultimately, behaviour).
The GCT describes the integration of peripheral stimuli with cortical variables, such as mood and anxiety, in the perception of pain. This
model contradicts the notion that pain is either somatic or psychogenic and instead postulates that both factors have either potentiating or
moderating effects on pain perception. In this model, for example, pain is not understood to be the result of depression or vice versa, but
rather the two are seen as evolving simultaneously. Any significant change in mood or pain will necessarily alter each other.
The GCT emphasises the integration of psychological variables such as past experience, attention and other cognitive activities into
research and therapy on pain. Prior to this formulation, psychological processes were largely dismissed as reactions to pain. This new
model suggested that cutting nerves and pathways was inadequate because a host of other factors modulated the input. Perhaps the major
contribution of the GCT was that it highlighted the central nervous system as an essential component in pain processes and perception.
The GCT has provided a powerful summary of the phenomena observed in the spinal cord and the brain, and has had enormous heuristic
value in stimulating further research in the basic science of pain mechanisms as well as in spurring new clinical treatments. The theory
provided a model that gave psychological factors a critical role in the pain experience and provided a critical foundation for contemporary
science.
In recent years, developments in imaging technology have offered a more detailed examination of pain-related brain activity, thus
providing a more comprehensive understanding of the impact of medical and psychological treatments on the central nervous system

(Apkarian et al., 2011; Jensen, 2010; Melzack, 1999; Seminowicz & Davis, 2006). As a result, current neurophysiological models emphasise
not a single "pain centre" within the brain, but rather a contribution of multiple integrated cortical systems (including underlying
psychological processes such as emotional/affective pain responses) in the experience of pain (Apkarian et al., 2009).
Despite challenges to the initially postulated anatomy and physiology, the GCT has proved remarkably resilient. It provides a powerful
summary of the phenomena observed in the spinal cord and brain, and this model has the capacity to explain many of the most mysterious
and puzzling problems encountered in the clinic. The GCT has had enormous heuristic value in stimulating further research in the basic
science of pain mechanisms as well as in spurring new clinical treatments. After the GCT was first described in 1965, no one could try to
explain pain exclusively in terms of peripheral factors.
A number of authors have extended the GCT to integrate more detailed psychological contributions, which has led to the presentation
of heuristic biopsychosocial or biobehavioural models of pain (e.g. Jensen & Turk, 2014; Turk, 1996; Turk & Flor, 1999). These conceptual
models emphasise the important contributions, mediating and modulation role of a range of cognitive, affective, and behavioural variables.
Before describing these models it is important to focus on the psychology of pain.
Psychology of Pain
Emotional distress is common in people with chronic pain. People with chronic and recurrent acute pain often feel rejected by the medical
system, believing that they are blamed or labelled as symptom magnifiers and complainers by their physicians, family members, friends and
employers when their pain condition does not respond to treatment. They may see multiple physicians and undergo numerous laboratory
tests and imaging procedures in an effort to have their pain diagnosed and successfully treated. As treatments expected to alleviate pain
are proven ineffective, they may lose faith and become frustrated and irritated with the medical system. As their pain persists, they may be
unable to work, have financial difficulties, difficulty performing everyday activities, sleep disturbance, or treatment-related complications.


They may be fearful and have inadequate or maladaptive support systems and other coping resources available to them. These consequences
of chronic pain can result in depression, anger, anxiety, self-preoccupation or isolation – in a word, demoralisation.
Biomedical factors, in the majority of cases, appear to instigate the initial report of pain. Over time, however, psychosocial and behavioural
factors (such as those described earlier) may serve to maintain and exacerbate the level of pain, influence adjustment, and contribute to
excessive disability. Following from this view, pain that persists over time should not be viewed as solely physical or purely psychological.
The experience of pain is maintained by an interdependent set of biomedical, psychosocial and behavioural factors.
Health care providers need to consider not only the physical basis of pain but also the person reporting pain's mood, fears, expectancies,
coping resources and response of significant others, including themselves. Regardless of whether there is an identifiable physical basis for
the reported pain, both psychosocial and behavioural factors will interact to influence the nature, severity and persistence of pain and
disability. We can extend the discussion of the psychology of pain by examining some specific affective and cognitive factors that are
particularly important in understanding chronic pain sufferers and their experiences.
Affective factors Pain is ultimately a subjective, private experience, but it is invariably described in terms of sensory and affective
properties. As defined by the International Association for the Study of Pain, "pain is unquestionably a sensation in a part or parts of the
body but it is also always unpleasant and therefore also an emotional experience" (Merskey, 1986). The affective components of pain include
many different emotions, but they are primarily negative emotions. Depression and anxiety have received the greatest amount of attention.
However, anger has recently received considerable interest as a significant emotion in individuals with chronic pain.
Depression Chronic pain has consistently been shown to be associated with negative mood and physical dysfunction, which can
contribute to depression and poor overall quality of life (Fishbain et al., 1997). Studies suggest that 40-50% of people with chronic pain
present with significant depression (Banks & Kerns, 1996; Dersh et al., 2006; White et al., 2013). As noted previously, in the majority of cases,
depression appears to be reactive, although some have suggested that chronic pain is a form of "masked depression," whereby it is more
acceptable to complain of pain than to acknowledge depressive symptoms.


Although a large number of people with chronic pain are depressed, why is it that they are not all depressed? Turk and colleagues (Okifuji
et al., 2000; Turk et al., 1995) determined that peoples' appraisals of the effects of the pain on their lives and of their ability to exert control
over the pain and their lives mediated the pain-depression relationship. That is, those who believed that they could continue to function and
maintain control despite their pain did not become depressed.
Anxiety Anxiety is a prevalent emotion observed in people with chronic pain (Gatchel et al., 2007). In the absence of physical pathology
to explain their pain they become fearful. The fear relates to activities that they anticipate will increase their pain or exacerbate whatever
physical factors might be contributing to the pain (Vlaeyen & Linton, 2012). These fears may contribute to avoidance, inactivity and greater
disability (Boersma & Linton, 2006). In addition to fear of movement, people with persistent pain may be anxious about the meaning of their
symptoms for the future - will their pain increase, will their physical capacity diminish, will they have progressive disability where they
ultimately end in a wheelchair or bedridden? In addition to these sources of fear, pain sufferers may fear that on the one hand people will
not believe that they are suffering, and on the other they may be told that they are beyond help and will "just have to learn to live with it." All
of these fears may contribute to increased muscle tension and physiological arousal that may exacerbate and maintain pain (Gatchel, 2005).
Anger Anger has been widely observed in people with chronic pain (Schwartz et al., 1991), with up to 53% reporting "bottled-
up anger" (Pilowsky & Spence, 1976). Even though people with chronic pain might present an image of themselves as even-tempered,
Corbishley et al. (1990) found that 88% acknowledged their feelings of anger when these were explicitly sought. This is perhaps not
surprising, given the frustrations related to persistence of symptoms, limited information on aetiology, and repeated treatment failures
along with anger towards others (employers, insurance companies, the health care system, family members) and anger towards themselves,
perhaps, for their inability to alleviate their symptoms and to move on with their lives.
Although the effects of anger and frustration on magnification of pain and treatment acceptance has not received much attention,
Kerns et al. (1994) noted that the internalisation of angry feelings was related to measures of pain intensity, perceived interference and
reported frequency of pain behaviours. Furthermore, Summers et al. (1991) found that anger and hostility were powerful predictors of pain

severity in people with spinal cord injuries. It is thus reasonable to expect that the presence of anger may serve as a complicating factor,
increasing autonomic arousal (Burns, 1997; Cacioppo et al., 1997) and blocking motivation and acceptance of treatments oriented towards
rehabilitation and disability management rather than cure, which are often the only treatments available for chronic pain (Fernandez &
Turk, 1995).
It is important to be aware of the significant role of negative mood in people with chronic pain clients because it is likely to affect treatment
motivation and adherence to treatment recommendations. For example, the person who is anxious may fear engaging in what they perceive
as demanding activities; individuals who are depressed and who feel helpless may have little initiative to comply; and those who are angry
with the health care system are not likely to be motivated to respond to recommendations from yet another health care professional.
Cognitive factors A great deal of research has been directed towards identifying cognitive factors that contribute to pain and disability.
These studies have consistently demonstrated that people's attitudes, beliefs and expectancies about their plight, themselves, their coping
resources and the health care system affect reports of pain, activity, disability and response to treatment (e.g. Burns et al., 2003; Jarvik et al.,
2005; Jensen et al., 1999; Thorn et al., 1999).
Beliefs about pain People respond to medical conditions in part based on their subjective ideas about illness and their symptoms. Studies
have shown that people who attribute their pain to a worsening of their underlying disease experience more pain despite comparable levels
of disease progression (e.g. Spiegel & Bloom, 1983). Because behaviour and emotions are influenced by interpretations of events (rather than
solely by objective characteristics of the event itself), when pain is interpreted as signifying ongoing tissue damage or a progressive disease,
it is likely to produce considerably more suffering and behavioural dysfunction than if it is viewed as being the result of a stable problem that
is expected to improve.
We can consider the case of a person who wakes up one morning with a headache to illustrate the important role of cognitive processes
in affect and behaviour related to noxious sensations. Very different responses would be expected if he attributed the headache to excessive
alcohol intake or a brain tumour. Thus, although the amount of nociceptive input in the two cases may be equivalent, the emotional and

behavioural responses would vary in nature and intensity. If the interpretation is that the headache is related to excessive alcohol, there
might be little emotional arousal. The man might take some over-the-counter analgesics, a hot shower, and take it easy for a few hours. On
the other hand, interpretation of the headache as indicative of a brain tumour is highly likely to create significant worry and might result in
a call to a neurologist.
Beliefs about the meaning of pain and one's ability to function despite discomfort are important aspects of expectations about pain. For
example, a cognitive representation that one has a very serious, debilitating condition, that disability is a necessary aspect of pain, that
activity is dangerous, and that pain is an acceptable excuse for neglecting responsibilities will likely result in maladaptive responses and
greater disability.
Once beliefs and expectancies are formed, they become stable and rigid and relatively impervious to modification. People with persistent
pain tend to avoid experiences that could invalidate their beliefs (disconfirmations) and guide their behaviour in accordance with these
beliefs, even in situations where these beliefs are no longer valid. It is thus essential for them to develop adaptive beliefs about the
relationships among impairment, pain, suffering and disability, and to de-emphasise the role of experienced pain in their regulation of
functioning. In fact, results from numerous treatment outcome studies have shown that changes in pain level do not parallel changes in
other variables of interest, including activity level, medication use, return to work, rated ability to cope with pain and pursuit of further
treatment (see Turk, 2002a). If health care providers hope to achieve better outcomes and reduce their frustration about patients' lack of
adherence to their advice, then they need to learn about, attend to and address patients' beliefs and expectancies within this therapeutic
context.
Self-efficacy Self-efficacy is a personal expectation that is particularly important in individuals with chronic pain. A self-efficacy
expectation is defined as a personal conviction that one can successfully execute a course of action (perform required behaviours) to produce
a desired outcome in a given situation (Bandura, 1977). Given sufficient motivation to engage in a behaviour, it is a person's self-efficacy
beliefs that determine the choice of activities that the he or she will initiate, the amount of effort that will be expended, and how long the

individual will persist in the face of obstacles and aversive experiences. Improving one's self-efficacy (through symptom management and
cognitive-behavioural therapy interventions) can lead to improvements in pain, physical functioning and psychological adjustment (Keefe
et al., 2004; Marks, 2001). In fact, a high degree of self-efficacy in people with chronic pain is associated with positive effects in physical
and psychological functioning (Asghari & Nicholas, 2001; Woby et al., 2005). In this way, self-efficacy plays an important role in therapeutic
change.
Efficacy judgements are based on four sources of information regarding one's capabilities, listed in descending order of effects (Bandura,
1977): one's own past performance at the task or similar tasks, the performance accomplishments of others who are perceived to be similar
to oneself, verbal persuasion by others that one is capable, and perception of one's own state of physiological arousal, which is in turn partly
determined by prior efficacy estimation. Performance mastery can then be created by encouraging people to undertake subtasks that are
initially attainable but become increasingly difficult, and subsequently approaching the desired level of performance (Dolce et al., 1986). It
is important to remember that coping behaviours are influenced by the person's beliefs that the demands of a situation do not exceed their
coping resources. For example, Council et al. (1988) asked people being treated for pain to rate their self-efficacy as well as expectancy of pain
related to performance during movement tasks. Performance levels were highly related to their self-efficacy expectations, which in turn
appeared to be determined by their expectancies regarding levels of pain that would be experienced.
Catastrophic thinking Distorted thinking can contribute to the maintenance and exacerbation of pain (Flor & Turk, 2011; Gatchel et
al., 2007). A particularly potent and pernicious thinking style that has been observed in people seeking treatment for chronic pain is
catastrophising (Sullivan et al., 2001). Catastrophising – experiencing extremely negative thoughts about one's plight and interpreting even
minor problems as major catastrophes appears to be a powerful way of thinking that greatly influences pain and disability. Research
has indicated that catastrophising and adaptive coping strategies are important in determining one's reaction to pain (Keefe et al., 2004;
Smeets et al., 2006; Sullivan et al., 2001). People who spontaneously used more catastrophising thoughts reported more pain, increased


illness behaviour, and greater physical and psychological dysfunction than those who did not catastrophise in several acute and chronic pain
studies (e.g. Granot & Ferber, 2005; Severeijns et al., 2005).
Coping Self-regulation of pain and its effects depends on the person's specific ways of dealing with pain, adjusting to pain, and reducing or
minimising pain and distress caused by pain; in other words, their coping strategies (DeGood & Tait, 2001). Coping strategies act to alter both
the perception of intensity of pain and one's ability to manage or tolerate pain and to continue everyday activities, and they can be assessed
in terms of overt and covert behaviours. Overt, behavioural coping strategies include rest, medication and the use of relaxation, among
others. Some of the more prominent covert coping strategies include various means of distracting oneself from pain, reassuring oneself that
the pain will diminish, seeking information and problem solving.
Studies have found active coping strategies (efforts to function in spite of pain or to distract oneself from pain, such as activity and
ignoring pain) to be associated with adaptive functioning, and passive coping strategies (depending on others for help in pain control and
restricted activities, avoiding activities because of fear of pain/injury, self-medication, alcohol) to be related to greater pain and depression
(Boothby et al., 1999). However, beyond this there is no evidence supporting the greater effectiveness of any one active coping strategy
compared to any other (Turk et al., 1983). It seems more likely that different strategies will be more effective than others for some people at
some times but not necessarily for all people all of the time. Regardless of the type of coping strategy, if people are instructed in the use of
adaptive coping strategies, their rating of intensity of pain decreases and tolerance of pain increases (Boothby et al., 1999).
Biopsychosocial Model of Pain
Given our discussion of the psychological factors that have been implicated as playing a role in pain, we can now consider how these factors
can be integrated within a multidimensional model of pain. An integrative model of chronic and acute recurrent pain needs to incorporate
the mutual interrelationships among physical, psychosocial and behavioural factors and the changes that occur among these relationships
over time. A model that focuses on only one of these sets of factors will inevitably be incomplete.


Although the GCT model proposed by Melzack and Wall (1965) introduced the role of psychological factors in the maintenance of pain
symptoms, it focused primarily on the basic anatomy and physiology of pain. The biopsychosocial model, in contrast, focuses primarily
on the psychological and cognitive-behavioural components of pain, and views illness as a dynamic and reciprocal interaction among
biological, psychological and sociocultural variables that shape the person's response to pain (Flor & Turk, 2011; Gatchel, 2005; Turk,
Wilson, & Swanson, 2011).
The conceptual view of the biopsychosocial model is depicted in Figure 20.2. The biopsychosocial model presumes some form of physical
pathology or at least physical changes in the muscles, joints or nerves that generate nociceptive input to the brain. At the periphery
nociceptive fibres transmit sensations that may or may not be interpreted as pain. Such sensation is not yet considered pain until
subjected to higher-order psychological and mental processing that involves perception, appraisal and behaviour. Perception involves the
interpretation of nociceptive input and identifies the type of pain (e.g. sharp, burning, punishing). Appraisal involves the meaning that
is attributed to the pain and influences subsequent behaviours. A person may choose to ignore the pain and continue working, walking,
socialising and engaging in previous levels of activity (Linton & Buer, 1995), or may choose to leave work, refrain from all activity
and assume the sick role. In turn, this interpersonal role is shaped by responses from significant others that may promote either the
healthy response or the sick role. The biopsychosocial model has been instrumental in the development of cognitive-behavioural treatment
approaches for chronic pain, including assessment and intervention. In the remainder of this chapter we will describe assessment and
treatment based on the multidimensional model with an emphasis on psychological factors (for extended discussions of medically based
assessment and treatment see Loeser et al., 2001; Turk & Melzack, 1999, 2001, 2010).


Social roles for
pain and illness

Pain
behaviour

Pain

Appraisal

Nociception

Figure 20.2 Biopsychosocial Model of Pain
Assessment
To understand and appropriately treat someone whose primary symptom is pain begins with a comprehensive history and physical
examination. People with persistent pain are usually asked to describe the characteristics (e.g. stabbing, burning), location and severity of
their pain. Physical examination procedures and sophisticated laboratory and imaging techniques are readily available for use in detecting
organic pathology. Although the assessment of pain may at first seem to be quite an easy task, it is complicated by the psychological,
social and behavioural characteristics of the person. Thus, in addition to this standard medical approach, an adequate pain assessment also
requires evaluation of the myriad psychosocial and behavioural factors that influence the subjective report.
Quantifying Pain Severity
Because there is no "pain thermometer" that can provide an objective quantification of the amount or severity of pain someone
experiences, it can only be assessed indirectly based on overt communication, both verbal and behavioural. However, even an individual's
communications make pain assessment difficult, as pain is a complex, subjective phenomenon comprised of a range of factors and is
uniquely experienced by each individual. As noted previously, wide variability in pain severity, quality and impact may be noted by people
with chronic pain as they attempt to describe what appear to be objectively identical phenomena. Descriptions of pain are also coloured by
cultural and sociological influences.
Physical and Laboratory Factors
Routine clinical assessment of individuals with chronic pain relies primarily on clinical judgements, although agreement among physicians
is surprisingly low. Poor inter-observer agreements have been noted in physical examinations of spinal motion and muscle strength, even

when using standard mechanical assessment devices (Hunt et al., 2001). Assessment of pain is further complicated by the fact that physical
and laboratory abnormalities correlate poorly with reports of pain severity, such that there is no direct linear relationship between the
amount of detectable physical pathology and the intensity of the pain reported. Furthermore, as we mentioned earlier, for significant
numbers of people with persistent pain no physical pathology can be identified using plain radiographs, CAT (computed axial tomography)
scans or electromyography to validate the report of pain severity.
Because of these issues, it is often not possible to make any precise pathological diagnosis or even to identify an adequate anatomical
or physiological origin for the pain. Despite these limitations, however, the history and physical examination remain the basis of medical
diagnosis and may be the best defence against over-interpreting results from sophisticated imaging procedures. Physicians must therefore
be cautious not to over-interpret either the presence or absence of objective findings. An extensive literature is available focusing on physical
assessment, radiographic and laboratory assessment procedures to determine the physical basis of pain and the extent of impairments in
adults (see Turk & Melzack, 2010).
Psychosocial Contributions
Based on the multidimensional perspective, health care providers need to search not only for the physical source of the pain through
examination and diagnostic tests but also the mood state, fears, expectancies, coping efforts, resources, responses of significant others and
the impact of pain on the individuals with chronic pain's lives. In short, the health care provider must evaluate the whole person (Turk,
Okifuji et al., 2008). Regardless of whether an organic basis for the pain can be documented or whether psychosocial problems preceded or
resulted from the pain, the evaluation process can be helpful in identifying how biomedical, psychosocial and behavioural factors interact to
influence the nature, severity and persistence of pain and disability.


Evaluating the Individuals Reporting Chronic pain
Turk and Flor (2013) suggested that three central questions should guide assessment of people who report pain:

1. What is the extent of the individual's disease or injury (physical impairment)?
2. What is the magnitude of the illness? That is, to what extent is the individual suffering, disabled and unable to enjoy usual activities?
3. Does the individual's behaviour seem appropriate to the disease or injury or is there any evidence of amplification of symptoms for any
of a variety of psychological or social reasons or purposes?

We will focus on the second two questions, specifically, the extent of the individual's disability and behavioural influences on the
individual's pain, distress and suffering. Evaluating these variables begins with gathering information from the person reporting pain, via
clinical interview and/or through standard assessment instruments.
Interview
When conducting an interview with individuals with chronic pain, the health care professional should focus not simply on factual
information but on the specific thoughts of patients and significant others (e.g. expectations, meaning of symptoms), and feelings and they
should observe specific behaviours. Individuals with pain beliefs about the cause of symptoms, their trajectory and beneficial treatments
will have important influences on emotional adjustment and adherence to therapeutic interventions. A habitual pattern of maladaptive
thoughts may contribute to a sense of hopelessness, dysphoria and unwillingness to engage in activity. The interviewer should determine
both the patient's and the significant others' expectancies and goals for treatment. An expectation that pain will be eliminated completely
may be unrealistic and will have to be addressed to prevent discouragement when this outcome does not occur.


Attention should focus on the patient's reports of specific thoughts, behaviours, emotions and physiological responses that precede,
accompany and follow pain episodes or exacerbation, as well as the environmental conditions and consequences associated with cognitive,
emotional and behavioural responses in these situations. During the interview, the clinician should attend to the temporal association of
these cognitive, affective and behavioural events, their specificity versus generality across situations, and the frequency of their occurrence,
to establish salient features of the target situations, including the controlling variables. The interviewer seeks information that will assist in
the development of potential alternate responses, appropriate goals for the individual and possible reinforcers for these alternatives.
Table 20.3 contains a list of 20 salient points that can be stated as questions worthy of considering with the person who report persistent
or recurring pain. When a number of these questions are endorsed, referral for more thorough evaluation by pain specialists should be
considered. Generally, a referral for evaluation may be indicated where disability greatly exceeds what would be expected based on physical
findings alone, when patients make excessive demands on the health care system, when the patient persists in seeking medical tests and
treatments when these are not indicated, when patients display significant emotional distress (e.g. depression or anxiety), or when the
patient displays evidence of addictive behaviours or continual non-adherence to the prescribed regimen. Table 20.4 contains a detailed
outline of the areas that should be addressed in a more extensive psychological interview.
Table 20.3 Screening Questions
1. Has the person's pain persisted for 3 months or longer despite appropriate interventions and in the absence of progressive disease?
[Yes]
2. Does the person repeatedly and excessively use the health care system, persist in seeking invasive investigations or treatments after
being informed these are inappropriate, or use opioid or sedative-hypnotic medications or alcohol in a pattern of concern to the
person's physician (e.g. escalating use)? [Yes]


3. Does the person come in requesting specific opioid medication (e.g. Dilaudid, Oxycontin)? [Yes]
4. Does the person have unrealistic expectations of the health care providers or the treatment offered ("Total elimination of pain and related symptoms")? [Yes]
5. Does the person have a history of substance abuse or is he or she currently abusing mind altering substances? [Yes] The person can be asked, "Have you ever found yourself taking more medication than was prescribed or have you used alcohol because your pain was so bad?" or " Is anyone in your family concerned about the amount of medication you take?"
6. Does the person display large number of pain behaviours that appear exaggerated (e.g. grimacing, rigid or guarded posture)? [Yes]
7. Does the person have litigation pending? [Yes]
8. Is the person seeking or receiving disability compensation? [Yes]
9. Does the person have any other family members who had or currently suffer from chronic pain conditions? [Yes]
10. Does the person demonstrate excessive depression or anxiety? [Yes] Straightforward questions such as, "Have you been feeling down?" or "What effect has your pain had on your mood?" can clarify whether this area is in need of more detailed evaluation.
11. Can the person identify a significant or several stressful life events prior to symptom onset or exacerbation? [Yes]
12. If married or living with a partner, does the person indicate a high degree of interpersonal conflict? [Yes]
13. Has the person given up many activities (recreational, social, familial, in addition to occupational and work activities) due to pain? [Yes]
14. Does the person have any plans for renewed or increased activities if pain is reduced? [No]
15. Was the person employed prior to pain onset? [No] If yes, does he or she wish to return to that job or any job? [No]
16. Does the person believe that he or she will ever be able to resume normal life and normal functioning? [No]

Note: If a combination of more than 6 "Yes" answers to the first 13 questions and "No" answers to the last 3 questions below or if general concerns in any one area,
consider referral for psychological assessment.
Table 20.4 Areas Addressed in Psychological Interviews
Experience of Pain and Related Symptoms
Location and description of pain (e.g. "sharp," "burning")
Onset and progression
Perception of cause (e.g. trauma, virus, stress)
What have they been told about their symptoms and condition? Do they believe that what they have been told is accurate?
Exacerbating and relieving factors (e.g. exercise, relaxation, stress, massage).
"What makes your pain worse?" "What makes your pain better?"
Pattern of symptoms (e.g. symptoms worse certain times of day or following activity or stress)
Sleep habits (e.g. difficulty falling asleep or maintaining sleep, sleep hygiene)
Thoughts, feelings, and behaviours that precede, accompany and follow fluctuations in symptoms
Treatments Received and Currently Receiving
Medication (prescribed and over-the-counter). How helpful have these been?
Pattern of medication use (as needed or time-contingent), changes in quantity or schedule
Physical modalities (e.g. physical therapy). How helpful have these been?
Exercise (e.g. Do they participate in a regular exercise routine? Is there evidence of deactivation and avoidance of activity due to fear of
pain or exacerbation of injury?). Has the pattern changed (increased, decreased)?
Complementary and alternative (e.g. chiropractic manipulation, relaxation training). How helpful have these been? Which treatments
have they found the most helpful?


Compliance/adherence with recommendations of health care providers.
Attitudes towards previous health care providers.
Compensation and Litigation
Current disability status (e.g. receiving or seeking disability, amount, percent of former job income, expected duration of support)
Current or planned litigation (e.g. "Have you hired a solicitor, barrister or attorney?")
Responses by Patient and Significant Others
Typical daily routine ("How much time do you spend sitting, standing, lying down?")
Changes in activities and responsibilities (both positive and obligatory) due to symptoms ("What activities did you use to engage in prior
to your symptoms?"
"How has this changed since your symptoms began?")
Changes in significant other's activities and responsibilities due to person's symptoms
Person's behaviour when pain increases or flares up ("What do you do when your pain is bothering you?"
"Can others tell when your pain is bothering you?"
"How do they know?")
Significant others' responses to behavioural expressions of pain ("How can significant others tell when your pain is bad?"
"What do your significant others do when they can tell your pain is bothering you?"
"Are you satisfied with their responses?")
What does the person do when pain is not bothering him or her (uptime activities)?
Significant other's response when person is active ("How does your significant other respond to your engaging in activities?")
Impact of symptoms on interpersonal, family, marital and sexual relations (e.g. changes in desire, frequency, or enjoyment)
Activities that person avoids because of symptoms
Activities continued despite symptoms

Pattern of activity and pacing of activity (can use activity diaries that ask the person to record his/her pattern of daily activities [time
spent sitting, standing, walking and reclining] for several days or weeks
Coping
How does the person try to cope with his or her symptoms? (e.g. "What do you do when your pain worsens?" "How helpful are these
efforts?").
Does person view himself or herself as having any role in symptom management? ("What role do you have in managing your pain?")
Current life stresses
Pleasant activities ("What do you enjoy doing?")
Educational and Vocational History
Level of education completed (any special training)
How long at most recent job?
How satisfied is the person with most recent job and supervisor?
What is liked least about most recent job?
Would the person like to return to most recent job?
If not what type of work is preferred?
Current work status (including homemaking activities)
Vocational and vocational plans
Social History
Relationships with family or origin
History of pain or disability in family members
History of substance misuse in family members
History of or current physical, emotional and sexual abuse


Was the person a witness to abuse of someone else?
Marital history and current status?
Quality of current marital and family relations
Alcohol and Substance Use
Current and history of alcohol use (quantity, frequency)
History and current use of illicit psychoactive drugs
History and current use of prescribed psychoactive medications
Consider the CAGE questions as a quick screen for alcohol dependence (Mayfield, McLeod, & Hall, 1987). Depending on response, consider
other instruments for alcohol and substance abuse (Allen & Litten, 1998; see Chapter 24 in this volume).
Psychological Dysfunction
Current psychological symptoms/diagnosis (depression including suicidal ideation, anxiety disorders, somatisation, post-traumatic
stress disorder)
Depending on responses, consider conducting formal SCID-5 (First et al., 2015).
Is the person currently receiving treatment for psychological symptoms? If yes, what treatments (e.g. psychotherapy or psychiatric
medications). How helpful?
History of psychiatric disorders and treatment including family counselling
Family history of psychiatric disorders
Concerns and Expectations
Patient concerns/fears (e.g. Does the person believe s/he has serious physical problems that have not been identified? Or that symptoms
will become progressively worse and he/she will become more disabled and more dependent? Does the person worry that he or she will be
told the symptoms are all psychological?)
Explanatory models ("What have you been told is the cause of your symptoms?"

"Does this explanation make sense?"
"What do you think is the cause of your pain now?")
Expectations regarding the future and regarding treatment (will get better, worse, never change)
Attitude towards rehabilitation versus "cure." Treatment goals.
Individuals with chronic pain problems often consume a variety of medications. It is important to discuss medications during the interview,
as many pain medications (particularly opioids) are associated with side effects that may mimic emotional distress. Moreover, opioids have
significant potential for being misused or abused. Even though abuse deterrent formulations are being developed, these will not eliminate
the need to carefully monitor potentially aberrant behaviours (e.g. using to boost mood, obtaining prescriptions from more than one
prescriber). A cautious clinical psychologist, for example, should be familiar with side effects that result in fatigue, sleep difficulties and
mood changes to avoid misdiagnosis of depression. A general understanding of commonly used medications for chronic pain is important.
During the interview, potential psychological dependence on pain-relieving medications should be evaluated. We have included a list of
some of the most commonly prescribed medications taken by people with chronic pain, their dosages and side effects in Tables 20.5-20.7.
Assessment Instruments
In addition to interviews, a number of assessment instruments have been developed to evaluate the experience of people with pain
including their attitudes, beliefs and expectancies about themselves, their symptoms and the health care system (see Table 20.8 for
a description of some of the most commonly used). Standardised instruments have advantages over semistructured and unstructured
interviews. They are easy to administer, require less time, assess a wide range of behaviours, obtain information about behaviours that may
be private (sexual relations) or unobservable (thoughts, emotional arousal), and most importantly, they can be submitted to analyses that

permit determination of their reliability and validity. These instruments should not be viewed as alternatives to interviews; rather, they may
suggest issues to be addressed in more depth during an interview or investigated with other measures.
Table 20.5 Non-Opioid Analgesics
Drug/drug class (trade name)
Average dosage/
dosage interval
(hours)
Common side effects*
Ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil, Rufen,
Nuprin, Medipren, others)
Naproxen (Naprosyn, Napralen)
Naproxen sodium (Anaprox)
Naproxen sodium OTC (Aleve)
Fenoprofen (Nalfon)
Ketoprofen (Orudis)
Ketoprofen OTC (Actron, Orudis-K+)
Oxaprozin (Daypro)
Indomethacin (Indocin, Indocin SR,
Indochron E-R)
200–400 mg (4–6)
500 mg initial, 250
mg subsequent (6–8)
550 mg initial, 275
mg subsequent (6–8)
220 mg (8–12)
200 mg (4–6)
25–50 mg (6–8)
12.5–25 mg (4–6)
600 mg (12-24)
25 mg (8–12)
1,4,5,8,9,10,14,18,19,20,21
1,4,5,8,9,10,14,18,19,20,21
1,4,5,7,9,11,12,13,15,22,23,24,25, 26,27,28,29
1,2,4,5,9,11,13,16,19
1,4,5,8,9,10,14,18,19,20,21
3,7,9,10,13,28
3,7,9,10,13,28
1,2,4,5,9,11,13,16,19
1,4,5,7,9,10,15,16,18,19,22


Sulindac (Clinoril)
Etodolac (Lodine)
Ketorolac (Toradol)
Tolmetin (Tolectin)
Mefenamic acid (Ponstel)
Dicolofenac potassium (Cataflam)
Meloxicam (Mobic)
Piroxicam (Feldene)
Nabumetone (Relafen)
150 mg (12)
300-400 mg (8-12)
30-60 mg or 30
mg initial, 15-30
subsequent (6)
200-600 mg (8)
500 mg initial, 250
mg subsequent (6)
50 mg (8)
7.5-15 mg (24)
20-40 mg (24)
1000 mg initial,
500-750 subsequent
(8-12)
1,4,5,8,9,10,14,18,19,20,21
1,4,5,8,9,10,14,18,19,20,21
1,4,5,9,10,14,19,20,21,30
1,4,5,8,9,10,14,18,19,20,21
1,4,5,8,9,10,14,18,19,20,21
1,3,7,12,15
1,4,7,9,10,12,22,23,28,30
1,2,4,5,9,15,30
1,4,5,8,9,10,14,18,19,20,21
COX-2 inhibitors
Celecoxib (Celebrex)
Other non-opioids
Acetaminophen (numerous)
Salicylates
Aspirin (numerous)
Diflunisal (Dolobid)
200-400 mg (12-24) 1,4,6,7,8,9
500-1,000 mg (4-6) Varies, depending on brand name
500-1,000 mg (4-6)
2,3,7,17
1,000 mg initial, 500 1,3,4,7,9,12,15,16,22

mg subsequent (8-
12)
Salts (Choline magnesium trisalicylate) 1,000-1,500 mg (12) 1,2,4,5,9,10,11,13,15,16,17,19
(Trilisate, Tricosal)
Acetaminophen (numerous)
500-1,000 mg (4-6) Varies, depending on brand name
Note: 1 = nausea, 2 = upset stomach, 3 = ulcers, bleeding, 4 = diarrhoea, 5 = constipation, 6 = indigestion, 7 = stomach/abdominal pain, 8 = gas, 9 = headache, 10 =
dizziness, 11 = heartburn, 12 = rash, 13 = drowsiness, 14 = weakness, 15 = tinnitus, 16 = vomiting, 17 = Reye's syndrome, 18 = depression, 19 = fatigue, 20 = dry
mouth, 21 = irregular menstrual periods, 22 = dyspepsia, 23 = flu-like symptoms, 24 = back pain, 25 = rhinitis, 26 = sinusitis, 27 = urinary tract infection, 28 =
oedema, 29 = dyspnoea, 30 = flatulence. *When prevalence data were available, common side effects are those which affect > 1% of patients taking the drug.
Table 20.6 Opioid Analgesics
Drug/drug class (trade name)
Average analgesic
dosage/dosage
interval (hours)
Codeine
30-60 mg
Oxycodone (Oxycontin)
5-20 mg
Meperidine (Demerol)
50-300 mg
Propoxyphene (Darvon)
65-130 mg
Hydrocodone
5-10 mg
Tramadol (Ultram)
50-100 mg (4-6)
Common side effects*
3,4,6,8,10,11,12,14,15,16,17,18,19,20
1,2,4,5,6,21,22,23,24,25,26
1,2,4,5,6,8,9,13,16,18,19,21,22,23,24,25,26,29
4,5,6,13,21,22,23,26,29
2,4,5,6,12,17,22,27,28,30,31,32
4,5,6,22,23,24,25,30


Pentazocine (Talwin)
50 mg
4,5,6,13,14,15,16,17,19,21,22,23,25,26,27,29
Morphine
30 mg
4,5,6,12,13,14,17,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,30,31
Hydromorphine (Dilaudid)
7.5 mg
2,4,5,6,21,22,27,28,30,31,32
Methadone
5-10 mg
2,6,24,26,27,29,31
Levorphanol (Levo-Dromoran)
1-4 mg
4,5,6,12,22,24,25,27,33,34
Oxymorphone
5 mg
4,5,6,12,22,24,25,27,33,34
Nalbuphine (Nubain)
10 mg
4,5,21,22,23,24,25,
Butorphanol (Stadol)
2 mg
4,5,6,13,22,24,25,29,31,35
Buprenorphine (Buprenex)
0.4 mg
4,5,23,25
Note: Range of dosage related to moderate vs. severe pain; 1 = shortness of breath, 2 = difficulty breathing, 3 = stomach bleeding, 4 = nausea, 5 = vomiting,
6 = constipation, 7 = tachycardia, 8 = bradycardia, 9 = palpitation, 10 = kidney damage, 11 = liver damage, 12 = itching, 13 = rash, 14 = blurred vision, 15 =
disorientation, 16 = hallucinations, 17 = depression, 18 = agitation, 19 = tremors, 20 = seizures, 21 = sedation, 22 = dizziness, 23 = headache, 24 = dry mouth, 25
= sweating, 26 = weakness, 27 = urinary difficulty, 28 = mood changes, 29 = euphoria, 30 = anxiety, 31 = drowsiness, 32 = restlessness, 33 = fatigue, 34 = muscle
twitches, 35 = insomnia *When prevalence data were available, common side effects are those which affect > 1% of patients taking the drug.

Table 20.7 Co-Analgesics: Administered to Enhance the Effects of Opioids or NSAIDs, or Counteract Side Effects of Analgesics
Drug/drug class (trade name) Used for
Notes
Common side effects*
Tricyclic antidepressants
Amitriptyline (Elavil),
desipramine, imipramine,
nortriptyline (Pamelor)
Treatment of neuropathic
pain; promotes sleep
Administered at lower doses
(25-100 mg/day) than
recommended antidepressant
doses (150-300 mg/day)
1,5,10,13,19,20,31,32,33,34,35

SSRI antidepressants
Fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine
(Paxil), citalopram (Celexa),
escitalopram (Lexapro)
SNRI antidepressants
Duloxetine (Cymbalta)
Milnacipran (Savella)
Antiepileptic drugs
Gabapentin (Neurontin),
pregabalin (Lyrica),
carbamazepine (Tegretol),
oxcarbazepine (Trileptal),
topiramate (Topamax),
sodium valproate (Depacon),
tiagabine (Gabitril),
levetiracetam (Keppra),
phenytoin (Dilantin),
lamotrigine (Lamictal),
zonisamide (Zonegran)
Local anaesthetics
Lidocaine, prilocaine
Glucocorticoids
Treatment of concurrent
depression associated
with chronic pain
Treatment of depression,
anxiety, and pain
associated with diabetic
peripheral neuropathy,
fibromyalgia, and chronic
musculoskeletal disorders
Treatment of pain
associated with
fibromyalgia
Treatment of neuropathic
pain/neuralgias, diabetic
neuropathy, migraine
prophylaxis; antiseizure
properties
Acute pain management,
post-herpetic neuralgia
1,4,9,19,36,37,39,35,39
1,4,5,7,9,10,13,16,19,20,31,36,37,38, 45,46,48,55,58,60
1,5,7,9,10,12,16,20,29,31,38,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59
Can be combined with TCAs if 2,5,8,10,12,13,14,19,20,28,29,35,46,61,62
TCA is inadequate to manage
pain
Administered topically via
cream or patches
12

Dexamethasone
Skeletal muscle relaxants
Carisoprodol (SOMA),
tizanidine (Zanaflex)
Antispasmodic agents
Baclofen
Antihistamines
Hydroxyzine (Vistaril, Atarax)
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam (Valium), lorazepam
(Ativan), clonazepam
(Klonopin)
Topical agents
Capsaicin
Dextroamphetamine
Phenothiazines
Chlorpromazine (Thorazine),
fluphenazine (Permitil,
Prolixin), prochlorperazine
(Compazine)
Others
Caffeine
Acute/chronic cancer pain
Temporary relief of acute
muscle injuries
Prevents muscle spasms
Aids sleep, counteracts
itching
Treatment of acute
anxiety or muscle spasm
associated with acute pain
Peripheral neuropathic
pain, arthritic pain
Post-operative period;
counteracts opioid
sedation
Antiemetic and
antipsychotic agents
Uterine cramping,
episiotomy pain, dental
Chronic use produces weight gain, osteoporosis, Cushing's syndrome, proximal
myopathy, psychosis; should not be used with NSAIDs
Should be used only for a
few days; carisoprodol often
causes dependence
1,5,9,10,13,14,19,20
1,8,10,13,14
2,9,10,13,20
10,13,39,40
Topical administration; must
be applied 3-4 times daily
May produce additive
analgesia when combined
with opioids
43
Prolonged use can lead to tardive dyskinesia, extrapyramidal manifestations
Increases analgesia when
given with aspirin-like drugs
31,36,39,42

pain, headaches, other
pain syndromes
Note: 1 = nausea, 2 = upset stomach, 3 = ulcers, bleeding, 4 = diarrhoea, 5 = constipation, 6 = indigestion, 7 = stomach/abdominal pain, 8 = gas, 9 = headache, 10 = dizziness, 11 = heartburn, 12 = rash, 13 =
drowsiness, 14 = weakness, 15 = tinnitus, 16 = vomiting, 17 = Reye's syndrome, 18 = depression, 19 = fatigue, 20 = dry mouth, 21 = irregular menstrual periods, 22 = dyspepsia, 23 = flu-like symptoms, 24 =
back pain, 25 = rhinitis, 26 = sinusitis, 27 = urinary tract infection, 28 = oedema, 29 = dyspnoea, 30 = flatulence, 31 = anxiety, 32 = sun sensitivity, 33 = restlessness, 34 = urinary difficulty, 35 = weight gain, 36 =
agitation, 37 = sexual dysfunction, 38 = sleep disturbances, 39 = vivid dreams, 40 = clumsiness, 41 = slurred speech, 42 = irritability, 43 = skin irritation, 44 = suicidal ideation (particularly in those < age 24), 45
= sweating/hot flush, 46 = blurred vision, 47 = serotonin syndrome (mental status changes, autonomic instability, neuromuscular symptoms, seizures, and/or gastrointestinal symptoms), 48 = palpitations, 49 =
tachycardia, 50= high blood pressure, 51 = hepatotoxicity, 52 = chest pain/discomfort, 53 = chills, 54 = upper respiratory tract infections, 55 = decreased appetite, 56 = paraesthesia, 57 = hypoesthesia, 58 = tremor,
59 = itching, 60 = weight loss, 61 = neuropathy, 62 = ataxia *When prevalence data were available, common side effects are those which affect > 1% of patients taking the drug.
Table 20.8 Commonly Used Self-Report Measures to Assess Pain and Pain-Related Constructs
Generic pain questionnaires
Domains assessed
#items Scoring
McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ),
Melzack (1975)
20
Vanderbilt Pain Management
Inventory (VPMI), Brown & Nicassio
(1987)
Active and passive coping strategies
specifically relevant to chronic pain
19
Physical functioning questionnaires
78 pain-related words grouped in 20
subclasses; respondents rank words
according to pain intensity; calculates
sensory, affective, evaluative and
miscellaneous scores, and a total score
("Pain Rating Index").
Calculates 2 scales: Active Coping and
Passive Coping


Pain Disability Index (PDI), Pollard
(1984)
Oswestry Disability Scale, Fairbank,
Couper, Davies, & O'Brien (1980).
Functional Independence Measure
(FIM), Keith, Granger, Hamilton, &
Sherwin (1987)

Pain condition-specific measures
Migraine Disability Assessment Scale
(MIDAS), Stewart, Lipton, Whyte,
Kolodner, Liberman, & Sawyer (1999)
Neuropathic Pain Scale (NPS), Galer &
Jensen (1997)
Measures disability due to pain
(degree to which person believes
pain interferes with family/home
responsibilities, recreation, social
activities, occupation, sexual
behaviour, self-care, life support
activity)
Measures disability
Measures physical and cognitive
ability, estimates burden of care

Impact of headaches on daily function
Assesses qualities of neuropathic
pain: sharpness, heat/cold, dullness,
intensity, unpleasantness, and surface
vs. deep pain
7
18
5
10
Derives a total score
Derives a total score
Items cover independence in self-care,
sphincter control, mobility, locomotion,
communication and social cognition.
Score ranges from 1 (total assistance) to 7
(complete independence).

Derives four scores: Grade I = little or no
disability, Grade II = Mild Disability, Grade
III = Moderate Disability, Grade IV = Severe
Disability
Derives total score


Psychosocial pain measures
Chronic Pain Coping Inventory (CPCI), Illness and well-focused coping 64 Calculates 8 subscales: Guarding, Resting,
Jensen, Turner, Romano, & Strom strategies Asking for Assistance, Relaxation, Task
(1995) Persistence, Exercising/Stretching, Coping
Self-Statements, Seeking Social Support
Chronic Illness Problem Inventory Assesses behavioural problems 65 Calculates 18 scales: Activities of Daily
(CIPI), Kames, Naliboff, Heinrich, & associated with a variety of chronic Living, Inactivity, Social Activity, Family/
Schag (1984) illnesses Friends Contact, Employment, Sleep,
Eating, Finances, Medication, Cognition,
Physical Appearance, Body Deterioration,
Sex, Assertion, Medical Interaction,
Marital Overprotection, Marital Difficulty,
Nonmarital Relationships
Vanderbilt Multidimensional Pain Revised VPMI: assesses ways of coping 49 Calculates 9 subscales: Planful Problem-
Coping Inventory (VCPMI), Smith, with pain Solving, Positive Reappraisal, Distraction,
Wallston, Dwyer, & Dowdy (1997) Confrontative Coping, Distancing/Denial,
Stoicism, Use of Religion, Self-Blame, Self-
Isolation
Coping Strategies Questionnaire (CSQ), Assesses specific coping strategies Calculates 7 subscales: Diverting
Rosenstiel & Keefe (1983) (six cognitive coping strategies; one Attention, Reinterpreting Pain, Coping
behavioural coping strategy) Self-Statements, Ignoring Pain, Praying
or Hoping, Catastrophising, Increasing
Activity


Fear-Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire
(FABQ), Waddell, Newton,
Henderson, Somerville, & Main
(1993)
Evaluates persons' beliefs about how
physical activity and work may affect
their back pain
16
Calculates 2 scales: Fear-avoidance beliefs
related to work, Fear-avoidance beliefs
about physical activity in general
Fear of Pain Questionnaire-III (FPQ-
III), McNeil & Rainwater (1998)
Measures pain anxiety/fear of pain
30
Calculates 3 scales: Fear of Severe Pain,
Fear of Minor Pain, Fear of Medical Pain
Illness Behavior Inventory, Turkat &
Pettegrew (1983)
Measures illness behaviours
20
Calculates 2 scales: Work-Related Illness
Behaviour (9 items), Social Illness
Behaviour (11 items)
Millon Behavioural Health Inventory
(MBHI), Millon, Green, & Meagher
(1983)
Evaluates psychological functioning of 150
medical patients
Calculates 8 scales that assess
dimensions of styles of relating to
health care providers (e.g. Cooperative,
Forceful), 6 scales that assess major
psychological stressors (e.g. Future
Despair, Social Alienation) and 6 scales
that assess probable response to illness
(e.g. G.I. Susceptibility) and treatment
interventions (e.g. pain treatment
responsivity)
Descriptor Differential Scale of Pain
Intensity (DDS-I), Gracley & Kwilosz
(1988)
Assesses intensity of pain
12
Derives a total score of pain intensity
Pain-O-Meter (POM) Affective subscale, Measures pain affect
14
Derives total Affective scale score


Gaston-Johansson (1996)
Pain Beliefs and Perceptions Inventory
(PBAPI), Williams & Thorn (1989)
Measures pain beliefs
16
Calculates 3 dimensions: Self-Blame,
Mystery (i.e. perception of pain as
mysterious), Stability (i.e. beliefs about the
stability of pain over time)
Pain Stages of Change Questionnaire
(PSOCQ), Kerns, Rosenberg, Jamison,
Caudill, & Haythornthwaite (1997)
Survey of Pain Attitudes (SOPA),
Jensen, Karoly, & Huger (1987)
Measures conditions that are relevant
for a person's readiness for change
30
Derives 4 stages of self-management:
Precontemplation, Contemplation, Action,
Maintenance
Measures beliefs about pain
57
Derives 7 dimensions: Control, Disability,
Harm, Emotion, Medication, Solicitude,
Medical Cure
Pain Anxiety Symptoms Scale (PASS),
McCracken, Zayfert, & Gross (1992)
Assesses fear of pain across cognitive,
psychological, and behavioural
domains
53
Calculates 4 subscales: Fear of Pain,
Cognitive Anxiety, Somatic Anxiety, Fear
and Avoidance
Pain Beliefs Questionnaire (PBQ),
Edwards, Pearce, Turner-Stokes, &
Jones (1992)
Assesses beliefs about pain
12
Calculates 2 subscales: Organic Beliefs (8
items), Psychological Beliefs (4 items)
Symptom Checklist-90 Revised
(SCL-90R), Derogatis (1983)
Measures presence and intensity of
symptoms: depression, somatisation,
anxiety, hostility, obsessive-
compulsive, interpersonal sensitivity,
phobic anxiety, paranoid ideation,
psychoticism
90
Calculates 3 global indices of distress
(Global Severity Index, Positive Symptom
Distress Index, Positive Symptom Total
score); domains most relevant for
chronic pain are depression, anxiety and
somatisation


Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS),
Sullivan, Bishop, & Pivik (1995)
Examines components of
13
catastrophising
Multidimensional/health-related quality of life measures
SF-36, Ware & Sherbourne (1992)
36
West Haven-Yale Multidimensional
Pain Inventory (WHYMPI), Kerns,
Turk, & Rudy (1985)
Measures pain severity, interference,
support, life control, affective distress,
others' responses to pain behaviours,
and frequency of performance on 18
common activities
52
Sickness Impact Profile (SIP), Bergner,
Bobbitt, Carter, & Gibson (1981)
Measures ambulation, mobility,
body care, social interaction,
communication, alertness, sleep and
rest, eating, work, home management,
recreation and pastime activities, and
emotional behaviour
136
Calculates 3 components: Rumination,
Magnification, Helplessness
Calculates mental health and physical
health scores; higher scores = better health
status
Higher scores on each scale reflect
higher levels of that dimension; scores
can be used to classify someone as
"dysfunctional," "interpersonally
distressed" or an "adaptive coper"
Calculates overall dysfunction score
and summary scores of physical and
psychosocial dysfunction; range of scores
= 0-100% dysfunction

General Ratings of Pain
Self-report measures of pain often ask people to quantify their pain by providing a single, general rating of pain: "Is your usual level of pain
'mild,' 'moderate,' or 'severe'?" or "Rate your typical pain on a scale from 0 to 10 where O equals no pain and 10 is the worst pain you can
imagine." More valid information may be obtained by asking about current level of pain or pain over the past week and by having the person

maintain regular diaries of pain intensity with ratings recorded several times each day (e.g. at meals and bedtime) for several days or weeks.
There are a number of simple methods that can be used to evaluate current pain intensity – numerical rating scale (NRS), descriptive ratings
scales and visual analogue scales (VAS).
Assessment of Function
Poor reliability and questionable validity of physical examination measures has led to the development of self-report functional status
measures that seek to quantify symptoms, function and behaviour directly, rather than inferring them. Self-report measures have been
developed to assess peoples' reports of their abilities to engage in a range of functional activities – such as the ability to walk up stairs, to sit
for specific periods of time, to lift specific weights and to carry out activities of daily living - along with the severity of the pain experienced
upon the performance of these activities.
In addition to self-report measures, there are a number of behavioural measures that have been used to assess real-time activity. Relatively
inexpensive and unobtrusive devices can be worn on the wrist or belt by the person being evaluated; such devices assess the frequency and
nature of such activities as walking and sleeping. Although these behavioural measures can provide objective information, they often do
not correlate highly with self-report measures. It is not that one method is preferred over the other but rather they are providing different
information - actual performance versus perception of ability and activity. These approaches complement each other but are both important
(Patel et al., 2013).
Assessment of Coping and Psychosocial Adaptation to Pain
Historically, psychological measures that are designed to evaluate psychopathological tendencies have been used to identify specific
individual differences associated with reports of pain, even though these measures were usually not developed for or standardised on
samples of medical patients. As stated previously, it is possible that their responses may be distorted as a function of the disease or the
medications that they take. For example, common measures of depression ask people about their appetites, sleep patterns and fatigue.

Disease status and medication can affect responses to such items, and scores may be elevated, which distorts the meaning of the responses.
More recently, a number of measures have been developed for use specifically with people reporting persistent pain; some are listed in Table
20.8. Instruments have been developed to assess psychological distress, the impact of pain on lives, feeling of control, coping behaviours, and
attitudes about disease, pain, and health care providers and the individual with pain's plight (Turk & Melzack, 1992, 2001, 2010).
Assessment of Overt Expressions of Pain
People display a broad range of responses that communicate to others that they are experiencing pain, distress and suffering - pain
behaviours. Some of these may be controllable by the person whereas others are not. Although there is no one-to-one relationship between
these pain behaviours and self-report of pain, they are at least modestly correlated.
A number of different observational procedures have been developed to quantify pain behaviours. Several investigators using the Pain
Behaviour Checklist (Turk et al., 1985) have found a significant association between these self-reports and behavioural observations.
Behavioural observation scales can be used by significant others as well. Health care providers can use observational methods to
systematically quantify various pain behaviours and note the factors that increase or decrease them. For example, observing the individual
in the waiting room, while being interviewed or during a structured series of physical tasks.
Uses of the health care system and analgesic medication are other ways to assess pain behaviours (see Table 20.8). People with pain
can record the times when they take medication over a specified interval such as a week. Diaries not only provide information about
the frequency and quantity of medication but may also permit identification of the antecedent and consequent events of medication use.
Antecedent events might include stress, boredom or activity. Examination of antecedents is useful in identifying patterns of medication use
that may be associated with factors other than pain per se. Similarly, patterns of response to the use of analgesic may be identified. Does the
person being evaluated receive attention and sympathy whenever he or she is observed by significant others taking medication? That is, do
significant others provide positive reinforcement for the taking of analgesic medication and thereby unwittingly increase medication use?


Evaluating Potential Substance Misuse or Misuse and Abuse During Treatment
As noted, opioid medications are among the most commonly prescribed medications for people experiencing pain. Although these drugs
can have beneficial effects on pain severity at least in the short term (the benefits of long-term use of opioids on physical function has not
been demonstrated), they have the potential for being misused (Chan et al., 2011; Furlan et al., 2006). A number of instruments have been
developed as attempts to predict which people with persistent pain prescribed long-term use of opioids are likely to misuse or abuse these
medications and to determine who may be misusing these drugs once they have been prescribed. However, the validity of these measures
has not been demonstrated, and therefore any strong recommendation for selecting among those available cannot be made (Turk, Swanson,
& Gatchel, 2008). A number of efforts are being made to improve on these but await empirical demonstration.
Treatment of Chronic Pain
Cognitive-Behavioural Model for the Treatment of Chronic Pain
The cognitive-behavioural model has become the most commonly accepted model for the psychological treatment of individuals with
chronic pain (Hoffman et al., 2007; Morley et al., 1999). The cognitive-behavioural perspective suggests that behaviours and emotions are
influenced by interpretations of events, and emphasis is placed on how peoples' idiosyncratic attitudes, beliefs and unique representations
filter and interact reciprocally with physical, cognitive, affective, and behavioural factors (Flor & Turk, 2011). The cognitive-behavioural
model incorporates many of the psychological variables previously described - namely anticipation, avoidance, and contingencies of
reinforcement - but suggests that cognitive factors rather than conditioning factors are of central importance. The cognitive-behavioural
model suggests that conditioned reactions are largely self-activated on the basis of learned expectations rather than automatically evoked.


The critical factor for the cognitive-behavioural model, therefore, is that people learn to predict events and to summon appropriate reactions.
It is the person's processing of information that results in anticipatory anxiety and avoidance.
Assumptions of the Cognitive-Behavioural Approach
There are five central assumptions that characterise the cognitive-behavioural approach. The first assumption is that all people are active
processors of information rather than passive reactors to environmental contingencies. People attempt to make sense of the stimuli from
the external environment by filtering information through organising attitudes derived from their prior learning histories and by general
strategies that guide the processing of information. People's responses (overt as well as covert) are based on these appraisals and subsequent
expectations and are not totally dependent on the actual consequences of their behaviours (i.e. positive and negative reinforcements and
punishments).
A second assumption of the cognitive-behavioural approach is that one's thoughts (e.g. appraisals, attributions and expectations) can
elicit or modulate affect and physiological arousal, both of which may serve as impetuses for behaviour. Conversely, affect, physiology
and behaviour can instigate or influence one's thinking processes. Thus, this cycle demonstrates the interaction of thoughts, feelings,
physiological activity and behaviour.
The third assumption of the cognitive-behavioural perspective is that behaviour is reciprocally determined by both the environment
and the person. People not only respond to their environment but also elicit environmental responses by their behaviour. In a very real
sense, people create their environments. The person who becomes aware of a physical event (symptoms) and decides the symptom requires
attention from a health care provider initiates a differing set of circumstances than a person with the same symptom who chooses to
selfmedicate or to ignore the symptoms.
A fourth assumption is that if people have learned maladaptive ways of thinking, feeling and responding, then successful interventions
designed to alter behaviour should focus on these maladaptive thoughts, feelings, physiology, as well as behaviours and not on one to the

exclusion of the others. There is no expectancy that changing only thoughts, feelings or behaviours will necessarily result in changes in the
other two areas.
The final assumption is that people are and should be considered active agents of change of their maladaptive modes of responding. People
with persistent pain, no matter how severe, despite their common beliefs to the contrary, are not helpless pawns of fate. They can and should
become instrumental in learning and carrying out more effective modes of responding to their environment and their plight.
From the cognitive-behavioural perspective, people with pain are viewed as having negative expectations about their own ability to
control certain motor skills when in pain. Moreover, individuals with chronic pain tend to believe they have limited ability to exert any
control over their pain. Such negative, maladaptive appraisals about the situation and personal efficacy may reinforce the experience
of demoralisation, inactivity, and over-reaction to nociceptive stimulation. These cognitive appraisals and expectations are postulated
as having an effect on behaviour leading to reduced efforts and activity, which may contribute to increased psychological distress
(helplessness) and subsequent physical limitations. If one accepts that pain is a complex, subjective phenomenon that is uniquely
experienced by each person, then knowledge about idiosyncratic beliefs, appraisals, and coping repertoires becomes critical for optimal
treatment planning and for accurately evaluating treatment outcome.
People experiencing persistent pain have evolved beliefs, appraisals and expectations about pain, their ability to cope, social supports,
their disorder, the medicolegal system, the health care system and their employers. These perceptions are all important because they may
facilitate or disrupt the individual's sense of control. These factors also influence their investment in treatment, acceptance of responsibility,
perceptions of disability, adherence to treatment recommendations, support from significant others, expectancies for treatment and
acceptance of treatment rationale.
Cognitive interpretations also affect how people present symptoms to others, including health care providers. Overt communication of
pain, suffering and distress will enlist responses that may reinforce pain behaviours and impressions about the seriousness, severity and
uncontrollability of pain. That is, reports of pain may induce physicians to prescribe more potent medications, order additional diagnostic

tests and, in some cases, perform surgery (Turk & Okifuji, 1997). Significant others may express sympathy, excuse the person with
chronic pain from responsibilities, and encourage passivity, thereby fostering further physical deconditioning. It should be obvious that
the cognitive-behavioural perspective integrates the operant conditioning emphasis on external reinforcement and respondent view of
conditioned avoidance within the framework of information processing (Flor & Turk, 2011).
As noted, people with persistent pain often have negative expectations about their own ability and responsibility to exert any control over
their pain. Moreover, they often view themselves as helpless. Such negative, maladaptive appraisals about their condition, situation, and
their personal efficacy in controlling their pain and problems associated with pain reinforce their experience of demoralisation, inactivity
and over-reaction to nociceptive stimulation. These cognitive appraisals are posited as having an effect on behaviour, leading to reduced
effort, reduce perseverance in the face of difficulty, and reduced activity and increased psychological distress.
For example, Mary (the subject of this chapter's case study) had a long-standing sense of herself as both physically and emotionally fragile
and needing special care and protection. When she felt pain, she believed that continuing to move was potentially physically damaging
and would thus lead to more pain. She felt powerless to help herself beyond resting, remaining still and taking analgesic medications - the
only safe and effective ways she knew to cope with her pain. The effects of these coping strategies were to reduce her activity level and
social outlets. They limited the possibility of being distracted from pain, reduced access to positive reinforcement of well behaviours, and
convinced her that she had almost no ability to decrease pain. She believed that significant others could and should help her bear the pain, by
sitting with her, listening to her and offering sympathy and understanding, as she had cared for her children for years when they were ill or
upset. She thus attributed most of the responsibility for pain management to others: doctors, family members and friends. Since doctors in
particular were in her words "writing [her] off" after numerous unsuccessful investigations and procedures, she felt angry at professionals
generally and sceptical about psychological input in particular.
The cognitive-behavioural perspective on pain management focuses on providing the individual with techniques to gain a sense of
control over the effects of pain on his or her life as well as actually modifying the affective, behavioural, cognitive and sensory facets of


the experience. For Mary, the treatment aimed to show her that she could affect her pain experience. Behavioural experiments help to
show people with chronic pain that they are capable of more than they assumed, increasing their sense of personal competence. Cognitive
techniques (e.g. self-monitoring to identify relationship among thoughts, mood, and behaviour, distraction using imagery and problem
solving - described later) help to place affective, behavioural, cognitive and sensory responses under the person's control.
The assumption is that long-term maintenance of behavioural changes will occur only if the person with pain has learned to attribute
success to his or her own efforts. There are suggestions that these treatments can result in changes of beliefs about pain, coping style
and reported pain severity, as well as direct behaviour changes. Treatment that results in increases in perceived control over pain and
decreased catastrophising also results in decreases in pain severity and functional disability. When successful rehabilitation occurs there is
a major shift from beliefs about helplessness and passivity to resourcefulness and ability to function regardless of pain, and from an illness
conviction to a rehabilitation conviction (Jensen et al., 1994; Tota-Faucette et al., 1993).
Components of Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy (CBT)
CBT interventions have been shown to reduce pain and disability and improve physical and psychological functioning in patients with
chronic pain conditions (Eccleston, Williams et al., 2009; Morley, 2011; Palermo et al., 2010; Williams et al., 2012). While the components
of CBT can vary (Gatchel et al., 2007; Morley, 2011), CBT interventions are generally comprised of four interrelated components: (1)
reconceptualisation, (2) skills acquisition, (3) skills consolidation and (4) generalisation and maintenance. We briefly describe each, but for
more detail the reader should see Turk et al. (1983), Turk and Meichenbaum (1984), and Turk (1997, 2002b).
Reconceptualisation
The cognitive-behaviour therapist is concerned not only with the role that patients' thoughts play in contributing to disability and to the
maintenance and exacerbations of symptoms, but also with the nature and adequacy of the individual's behavioural repertoire. The strategic
plan of a CBT intervention, then, is to facilitate a patient's reconceptualisation of their plight. The benefits of reconceptualisation are that


it provides a more benign view of the problem than the original view held; it translates physical and psychological symptoms from vague,
uncontrollable problems into specific, addressable problems; and it focuses on solutions to problems that should foster hope and expectancy
for success.
It is hard for many people with persistent pain to accept that their thoughts and emotions can actually affect their bodies. To convince
them of this fact, it is useful to have them selfmonitor the thoughts and feelings that precede, accompany and follow a pain episode or
pain flare-up. When individuals monitor their thoughts, a number of thoughts and beliefs that might lead to increased muscle tension and
increased emotional distress are frequently identified. For example, Mary (from the case study) thought, "I feel as though I can't take it any
more," "I can't do anything when my pain is bad," and "I don't see how this pain is ever going to get better."
Daily diaries are useful diagnostically and clinically. They have the potential of demonstrating to the clinician and the person experiencing
pain the patterns of maladaptive thinking and pain behaviours that may be contributing to their pain experience. In a diary, a person with
persistent pain can record when their pain was particularly severe, what the situation was at the time of the pain (including what they
thought about and felt prior to the exacerbation of pain or pain episode), during the episode, and after the episode, as well as what they tried
to do to help alter the pain experienced. Examination of these diaries can lead to identification of maladaptive patterns of thoughts, feelings,
behaviours and pain flare-ups. From Mary's diary, she realised that pain was worst in the evening and on weekends, periods when she had too
much time on her hands and missed her children most.
Once specific associations of thoughts, emotions and pain are identified, the person with pain can be guided to consider alternative
thoughts and strategies that might be used in similar circumstances. He or she can try these alternative thoughts and record the effects.
The crucial element in the successful treatment is bringing about a shift in the repertoire from wellestablished, habitual and automatic but
ineffective responses towards systematic problem solving and planning, control of affect, behavioural persistence or disengagement when
appropriate.

Reconceptualisation goes on throughout treatment and involves reorienting the person from his or her belief that symptoms or physical
impairment are an overwhelming, allencompassing sensory experience resulting solely from tissue pathology and that he or she is helpless
to do anything about them to a concept that symptoms and impairments can be differentiated and systematically modified and controlled
by the sufferers themselves. Part of reconceptualisation is a method called cognitive restructuring. Like reconceptualisation, cognitive
restructuring is designed to increase awareness of the role thoughts and emotions play in potentiating and maintaining stress and physical
symptoms. With this method, the therapist elicits the person with persistent pain's thoughts, feelings and interpretations of events; gathers
evidence for or against such interpretations; identifies habitual self-statements, images and appraisals that occur; tests the validity of these
interpretations; identifies automatic thoughts that set up an escalating stream of negative, catastrophising ideation; and helps examine how
such habitual thoughts exacerbate stress and interfere with performance of adaptive coping responses.
Steps in cognitive restructuring include: identifying maladaptive thoughts during problematic situations (e.g. during pain exacerbations,
stressful events); introducing and practising coping thoughts; shifting from self-defeating to coping thoughts; introducing and practising
positive or reinforcing thoughts; and home practice and follow-up. Using these steps, the clinical psychologist encourages the person
with chronic pain to test the adaptiveness (not the so-called rationality) of individual thoughts, beliefs, expectations and predictions.
One thought that was worked on extensively with Mary was the belief that "moving when in pain causes damage and more pain." Mary
conducted a cost-benefit analysis of this belief, as well as of an alternative belief that "moving when in pain is helpful and can reduce pain."
She agreed to gather evidence for and against the belief, by reviewing initially times in the past when she had moved and had not moved
when in pain. Initially very sceptical about the alternative belief, Mary agreed to engage in a specific activity while in pain, walking with a
friend for 10 minutes during the day. Before the activity, she rated how much she believed this new belief, and rated it again after walking
over a 3-week period, as well as rating pain intensity at intervals throughout the day. She was surprised to realise that her pain ratings did
not increase following walking and if anything reduced slightly, and thus her belief in the idea that moving is helpful and can reduce pain
increased over a number of weeks.


With cognitive restructuring, individuals with chronic pain may be asked to relive in their mind's eye one or more recent experiences of
stress as if they were running a movie in slow motion in their mind, eliciting thoughts and feelings around specific events and responses
(imagery recall). A number of questions might be used to guide thinking, such as: "Is there anything common about these situations?" "What
thoughts and feelings preceded, accompanied, and followed the situation?" "How did you cope with the situation?" "How did it resolve?"
Through self-monitoring, the clinical psychologist helps individuals identify when they are becoming stressed, assists them to become
aware of low-intensity cues, then examines the contribution of their thoughts and de-automatises the connection between events and
arousal or distress. For example, a recent conflict with a spouse might be examined to determine whether the individual with chronic pain
getting upset had any effect both on the physical and psychological symptoms experienced. Mary recognised that preparations for family
events were a stress trigger and that she had many anxious thoughts and images of the event going badly, being blamed by the family and
feeling like a failure. To reduce her anxiety about this happening, she worked furiously to prepare food and clean the home, and her anxiety
and associated muscle tension exacerbated pain. Using a thought record to explore the thought "it's my fault if this party is a flop," she
identified the new belief that she and the family shared responsibility for the event going well.
Treatment is viewed as a collaborative process by which the psychologist carefully elicits the troublesome thoughts and concerns of
people experiencing persistent pain, acknowledges their bothersome nature, and then constructs an atmosphere in which the person can
critically challenge the validity of his or her own beliefs. Rather than suggesting alternate thoughts, the clinical psychologist attempts to
elicit competing thoughts from the individual presenting with chronic pain and then reinforces the adaptive nature of these alternatives.
People have well-learned and frequently rehearsed thoughts about their condition. Only after repetitions and practice in cuing competent
interpretations and evaluations will they come to change their conceptualisations.
Because significant others may contribute to unwittingly undermining changing conceptualisations, the clinical psychologist should
attempt to ascertain how significant others respond to the individual with pain and when their manner of response is an inappropriate

attempt to help alter these. This may be accomplished by encouraging those seeking treatment for chronic pain to discuss the responses of
significant others openly. It may be desirable to have them practise how to conduct this discussion with the clinical psychologist.
Throughout treatment it is important to permit and even to urge individuals with chronic pain to express their concerns, fears and
frustrations, as well as their anger directed towards the health care system, insurance companies, employers, social system, family, fate
and perhaps themselves (Okifuji et al., 1999). During the reconceptualisation process, symptoms are explained briefly within the context
of the role of stress on physical functioning. Caution should be exercised in suggesting that psychological factors or psychiatric illness play
a causal role in symptoms. For many people with chronic pains, such suggestions imply that they are imaging or exaggerating symptoms,
are at fault for being ill, or are going "crazy." Common ground can be established by discussing the role of stress in medical conditions.
The reconceptualisation process can be enriched through educating the person with pain about common cognitive errors made. A list of
common cognitive errors is listed in Table 20.9.
Once cognitive errors that contribute to pain perception, emotional distress and disability are identified they become the target
of intervention. Patients are usually asked to generate alternative, adaptive ways of thinking and responding to minimise stress and
dysfunction (e.g. "I'll just take one day at a time," "I'll try to relax and calm myself down," "Getting angry doesn't accomplish anything, I'll try
to explain how I feel."). Patients will usually be asked to practise these at home and to review these during therapy sessions.
The clinical psychologist's skills and the relationship that is established between the clinical psychologist and person with pain grease the
gears of treatment; without a satisfactory therapeutic alliance, treatment will grind to a halt. Treatment should not be viewed as a rigid
process with fixed techniques. There is a need to individualise the treatment programme for specific individuals; however, the cognitive-
behavioural rationale described earlier remains constant.
Table 20.9 Common Thinking Errors Observed in Individuals with Chronic Pain

Overgeneralisation
Extrapolation from the occurrence of a specific event or situation to a large range of possible situations. For
example, "This coping strategy didn't work, so none of them will work."
Catastrophising
Focusing exclusively on the worst possibility regardless of its likelihood of occurrence. For example, "This pain
in my in my back means my condition is degenerating and my whole body is falling apart." Several acute and
chronic pain studies have demonstrated that individuals who spontaneously utilise fewer catastrophising self-
statements reported more pain than those who did not catastrophise.
All-or-none thinking
Considering only the extreme best or worst interpretation of a situation without regard to the full range of
alternatives. For example, "If I am not feeling perfectly well, I cannot enjoy anything."
Jumping to conclusions Accepting an arbitrary interpretation without a rational evaluation of its likelihood. For example, "The doctor
is avoiding me because he thinks I am a hopeless case."
Selective attention
Selectively attending to negative aspects of a situation while ignoring any positive things. For example,
"Physical exercises only serve to make me feel worse that I already do."
Negative predictions
Assuming the worst. For example, "I know this coping technique will not work," or "If I lose my hearing as a
result of chemotherapy my husband will no longer find me attractive."
Mind-reading
Instead of finding out what people are thinking, make assumptions. For example, "My family does not talk to
me about my pain because they don't care about me."
Skills Acquisition and Consolidation
Cognitive and behavioural treatment makes use of a whole range of techniques and procedures designed to bring about alterations
in individuals with chronic pain' perceptions of their situation, their mood, and their behaviour and their abilities to modify these
psychological processes. Techniques such as progressive relaxation training, problemsolving training, distraction skills training, and

communication skills training, to name only a few, have all been incorporated within the general cognitivebehavioural framework. Some
common techniques used in CBT are described next.
Relaxation Among the more common and practical techniques to control pain are controlled breathing and muscle relaxation. Relaxation
has been shown to reduce pain intensity (Ostelo et al., 2005), and while the effects of relaxation alone can be limited (Jensen et al., 2009;
Thorsell et al., 2011), it is typically a component of interdisciplinary pain treatment and cognitive-behavioural interventions (Buenaver et
al., 2010). Relaxation can be used for its direct effects on specific muscles, for reduction of generalised arousal, for its cognitive effects (as a
distraction or attention-diversion strategy), and for its value in increasing the sense of control and selfefficacy. Relaxation skills are generic,
and there are a wide range of different techniques (e.g. biofeedback, imagery, controlled breathing) geared towards coping with stress and, in
particular, how to reduce site-specific muscular hyperarousal.
One type of relaxation technique known as progressive muscle tensionreduction relaxation is useful because (1) it has face validity, (2) it is
a concrete procedure and thus easy to recall and practise at home and (3) it is less prone than passive relaxation techniques to failure due to
distraction by symptoms or cognitive intrusions. The idea behind progressive muscle relaxation is that if muscle tension results in increased
symptoms, it can be reasoned that the converse, muscle relaxation, leads to symptom reduction. One benefit of this technique is that it can
be used outside the therapeutic setting (i.e. at home, at work) to decrease pain symptoms.
With progressive muscle relaxation, the clinical psychologist first induces a state of relaxation, with controlled breathing. The clinical
psychologist then teaches the person how to tense and relax specific muscle groups in a sequential fashion. (Progressive muscle relaxation
exercises are given in Table 3.5 in Chapter 3.) Following each session, the clinician can reiterate that progressive muscle relaxation is a skill,
and like any skill requires good practice. Specific home assignments can be given to practise progressive muscle relaxation, self-monitor,
and record progress. At the beginning of each subsequent session, the clinical psychologist reviews the self-monitored practice charts to
identify problems and to reinforce effort as well as success. After the person has become proficient in relaxation, it is useful to have them
imagine themselves in various stress or conflict situations and to visualise themselves employing the relaxation skills in those situations. In


subsequent sessions, the clinical psychologist teaches that one can relax not only by tensing and releasing muscle groups as in progressive
relaxation or by means of some passive activities such as controlled breathing, but also by means of absorbing activities such as physical
activity (walking, swimming), hobbies (knitting, gardening) and so forth.
Where pain is due to muscle spasm, muscle relaxation procedures may be effective in reducing pain by decreasing or preventing this
process. Engaging in muscle relaxation may also reduce the anxiety and distress that accompany persistent pain or trigger pain episodes.
Relaxation can improve sleep, which may have secondary benefits; it is much easier to cope when rested than fatigued due to lack of sleep.
Muscle relaxation may also serve to distract the individual from noxious sensations.
It is helpful to begin relaxation exercises early in treatment because they can be readily learned by almost all individuals and they can
quickly give the person a sense of self-efficacy in the management of their symptoms. There are many types of relaxation, and no one best
approach has been demonstrated to be more effective than any other. Different approaches can be learned in order to find the one that is most
useful. Regardless of the type of relaxation used, the clinical psychologist should discuss with his or her patients how to identify bodily signs
of physical tenseness, the stress-tension cycle, how occupying one's attention can short-circuit stress, how relaxation can reduce anxiety
because it enables them to exert control, how relaxation and tension are incompatible states, and finally, how unwinding after stressful
experiences can be therapeutic. Mary learned some relaxation techniques and used them for a half-hour before going to bed at night. She
found her ability to fall asleep improved and her sleep was less interrupted. This had a positive effect on her confidence in the clinical
psychologist and in psychological treatment. Better rested, she also increased her ability to bear pain.
Problem solving Problem solving consists of six steps. Each step is related to specific questions or actions: (1) problem identification (What
is the concern?); (2) goal selection (What do I want?); (3) generation of alternatives (What can I do?); (4) decision making (What is my
decision?); (5) implementation (Do it!); and (6) evaluation (Did it work? If not, recycle.).
An important first step is to identify the situations that are associated with pain. The use of selfmonitoring can help to identify the
links between thoughts, feelings, and pain, and thereby identify the problem. Once a set of problems has been identified, the next step is

to enumerate a set of possible solutions and evaluate the likely outcomes of implementing each possible solution. The last step is to try the
strategies and evaluate the outcome. If the first strategy is not successful, the other options can be reviewed and the person can decide to
try another possible solution. By using problem-solving strategies, for example, an individual is able to target the situations that trigger the
muscle tension associated with the pain. After using successful problem-solving approaches, an individual can build confidence in his or
her ability to handle stressful situations. Regarding Mary's anxiety about family gatherings and precipitating further acute pain episodes,
she identified a number of possible solutions: asking another family member to host the event, hosting the event at a commercial venue,
getting caterers to provide the food in her home, asking her children to prepare or buy some of the food, reducing the ambitiousness and
laboriousness of the dishes she was preparing, asking her children to assist her in cleaning and preparing the house, reducing her standards
for pre-party cleaning and decorating, and hosting the venue outdoors buffet/picnic-style. Mary decided that she really liked to host family
events. She agreed to share the food preparation with her children and to hold the event outdoors with disposable plates and glasses. The
event went off well, with family members appreciating the new informality of the event and enjoying themselves. While Mary experienced
some pain, she was able to stay at the party and enjoyed the event.
Distraction People who have persistent pain often try to distract themselves by reading books, watching television, engaging in hobbies or
listening to music. Using thoughts and imagination can also help people distract themselves from their bodies and pain. The idea behind
cognitive distraction is that taking one's mind off of pain by attending to something else may lead to reduced perceptions of pain and reduce
levels of stress arousal. For this reason, cognitive distraction techniques are best used during pain episodes when symptoms are exacerbated.
An example of cognitive distraction is when a clinical psychologist asks someone to close his or her eyes and to focus attention on some
part of his or her body. The clinical psychologist then notes some ambient sound such as the ventilation system and suggests that while
attending to their body, they were not aware of the sound of the air conditioning. The clinical psychologist calls attention to the sound of
ventilation but then reminds them that they have stopped focusing on their body. The clinical psychologist also might call their attention to

some part of their body that they were not attending to, such as the gentle pressure of their watch on their wrist. The point is that there is
environmental (internal and external) input that remains out of conscious attention until they focus directly on it.
Different cognitive coping strategies that have been studied in the literature can be classified into five different groups: (1) focusing on
the environment rather than on the body; (2) neutral images; (3) dramatised images, where the painful part was included in the image (e.g.
imaging that one is a spy who has been wounded but is trying to escape); (4) pleasant images; and (5) rhythmic activity (e.g. singing a song).
Each of these different strategies has been shown to be effective for mild to moderate pain. Fernandez and Turk (1989) concluded that no
one coping strategy was consistently more effective than any other; however, the imagery strategies as a set seem to be more effective than
those that did not include any imagery. Mary was instructed in and tried all five types of distraction strategies. She found singing songs
from musicals helpful. She discovered that talking on the telephone about subjects apart from her pain was also distracting, and she found
it helpful to imagine pleasant scenarios, such as lying on a beach or travelling to exotic locations.
Imagery is a useful strategy for helping individuals to relax and distract themselves from pain. It is important to customise any images by
asking them to identify specific situations that they find pleasant and engaging. A detailed image can then be created with the person. When
he or she is feeling pain or is experiencing pain exacerbation, imagery can be used to redirect his or her attention away from their pain. It
seems that the most successful images are those that involve all of the senses: vision, sound, touch, smell, and taste. Thus images that evoke
these various senses should be encouraged. Some people, however, may have difficulty generating a particularly vivid visual image and may
find it helpful to listen to a recorded description or purchase a poster that they can focus their attention upon as a way of assisting their
imagination.
The more success in making use of a skill, the greater the feeling of selfcontrol, which can serve to decrease muscle tension, reduce
production of stress hormones and lower pain severity. Imagery and other cognitive coping strategies are usually combined with other
techniques such as cognitive restructuring, relaxation and problem solving, and would not be suggested as the sole treatment approach for
dealing with persistent pain.


Biofeedback
Biofeedback has been used to treat a number of chronic pain states such as headaches, back pain, and pain associated with
temporomandibular disorders (Flor & Turk, 2011). Biofeedback procedures teach individuals to exert control over physiological processes,
such as muscle tension, of which they have only marginal awareness. When a person undergoes biofeedback, she or he is attached to
equipment that records physiological responses such as skin conductance, respiration, heart rate, skin temperature, and muscle tension.
He or she sits in front of a monitor that displays the results from all the recordings. The biofeedback equipment converts the readings
of physiological responses into visual or auditory signals that the individual uses as the basis for developing voluntary control of the
physiological response. The physiological information is fed back to the person so that he/she can learn about physiological activity and try
to alter it by their thoughts or breathing.
As individuals achieve success controlling physiological activity, they can practise the techniques that they have learned in different
situations without needing to use the biofeedback apparatus. With practice most people can learn to control voluntarily important
physiological functions that may be associated directly with pain and stress. As with imagery, biofeedback is usually used in conjunction
with other modalities such as cognitive restructuring.
Exercise and Activity Pacing
Physical exercise and activities are important not only to building muscle strength, flexibility and endurance, but also in bolstering a person's
sense of control over physical functioning. People with chronic pain conditions should begin physical exercises at a level that is reasonably
comfortable and gradually increase the levels of activity. It is important for people with chronic pain to learn to pace their activities and
rest only after attaining the specified activity rather than the experience of pain, and they should be reminded that hurt and harm are not
equivalent. People with significant chronic pain may be reluctant to perform some activities (perhaps due to fear of further injury or pain),
and a clinical psychologist or physical therapist should address these fears or worries. It is also helpful to keep charts of the activities so that

progress can be monitored. Then each day a recording can be made of the amount of the specific activity (e.g. walking distance, number of
sit-ups) that was achieved for that day (Fordyce, 1976). In time, the benefits of exercise will be evident not only in the recordings on paper,
but also in feeling physically and emotionally more healthy. As mentioned earlier, Mary initially agreed to walk for 10 minutes a day despite
any pain experienced. She began walking with a friend because she realised that she did not feel her pain as badly when around other people.
She gradually increased the duration of her walking to 40 minutes 5 times a week. Reluctant to try swimming because of prior experiences
with pain after it, she tried for a while but soon gave it up, as she admitted that she disliked the water.
Assertiveness and Communication Skills Training
Assertiveness training is often an important intervention for enabling a person with persistent pain to re-establish his or her roles,
particularly within the family, and thus to regain a sense of self-esteem and potency. Through role-playing (described shortly) of existing
tension-producing interpersonal transactions, the clinical psychologist can help identify and modify maladaptive thoughts, feelings and
communication deficiencies underlying non-assertiveness, while practising more adaptive alternatives. The patient may find assertiveness
training useful in addressing reactions from family members and health care providers that may be opposing the individual with pain's self-
management objectives. Mary worked with the clinical psychologist on asking her husband and children for time and attention at times
when she was well, for example coming with her to a movie she particularly wanted to see or discussing and taking seriously her plans for
taking an evening class in feng shui.
Role-Playing and Role-Reversal
Role-playing is useful not only in the rehearsal of new skills but also in the identification of potential problem areas that may require special
attention. Most typically, the patient is asked to identify and participate in a role-play situation indicative of a particular problematic area for
him or her. In this way he or she can rehearse potential responses in specific problem situations. In a variation on role-playing, role-reversal,
the patient is asked to role-play a situation in which he or she and the clinical psychologist reverse roles, with the clinical psychologist

assuming the role of another person with a similar physical diagnosis to the patient who has not received the specific skills training. It is
known from research on attitude change that when people have to improvise (as in role-playing or role-reversal), they generate exactly the
kinds of arguments, illustrations, and motivating appeals that they regard as most salient and convincing. These exercises contribute to self-
persuasion and also permit the clinical psychologist to determine areas of confusion and potential difficulties. Mary swapped roles with the
clinical psychologist to discuss the idea that when pain was really bad, she needed to lie down and could not be expected to continue with
normal chores and responsibilities. She engaged in some very encouraging and empathic conversation, where she acknowledged how hard
it must be but pointed out the benefits of keeping busy and active and the costs of staying in bed.
Home Assignments and Practice
Home assignments are especially useful both for assessing and treating people with chronic pain, as they provide important feedback to
both the person and his or her clinical psychologist. The idea behind home assignments is that the individual can practise skills learned
during therapy sessions in real-world situations. They can then return to the clinical psychologist and report on any progress or obstacles
(which can then be examined and become a focus for problem solving). The purpose of home assignments is that they are able to assess
various areas of the person's life and how they influence or are affected by the pain problem, to assess responses of others to the person, to
help the person become more aware of factors that exacerbate pain, to help the person identify maladaptive responses to pain, to remind
them that they can achieve their goals, to identify obstacles to self-management, and to assist the clinical team in evaluating progress and
modifying goals.
Home assignments and practice should be mutually agreed upon, as reluctance from the patient may lead to non-completion of
assignments. During treatment, each task is targeted towards observable and manageable tasks staring with those that are most readily
achievable and progressing to more difficult ones. The purposes of graded tasks are to enhance the sense of competence and to reinforce their

continued efforts. Successful completion of these assignments can be reinforced and maladaptive patterns that inhibit rehabilitation can be
identified and addressed directly.
Preparation for Generalisation and Maintenance
To maximise the likelihood of maintenance and generalisation of treatment gains, cognitive-behavioural clinical psychologists focus upon
the cognitive activity of patients as they are confronted with problems throughout treatment (e.g. failure to achieve specified goals, plateaus
in progress on physical exercises, recurrent stresses). These events are employed as opportunities to assist those being treated for chronic
pain to learn how to handle such setbacks and lapses because they are probably inevitable and will occur once treatment is terminated.
Recently developed technologies, such as web-based programs, smartphone applications, and email reminders have shown potential to
assist with maintenance and generalisation of interventions among both adults and adolescents (Macea et al., 2010; Naylor et al., 2010;
Palermo et al., 2009; Ruehlman et al., 2012), as they are convenient to use and allow for additional privacy (Murray et al., 2005; Webb et al.,
2010).
It is helpful to assist the individual with persistent pain to anticipate future problems, stress and symptomexacerbating events and to
plan coping and response techniques before these problems occur (e.g. relapse prevention). Those being treated are helped to identify high-
risk situations (non-supportive spouse, conflict with child) and the types of coping and behavioural responses that may be necessary for
successful coping. The benefit of relapse prevention is that it gives the understanding that minor setbacks are to be expected, but that they
do not signal total failure.
In the final stage of treatment, discussion is focused on possible ways of predicting and avoiding difficult and problematic situations in
general, as well as specific ones identified during treatment. It is important to note that all possible problematic circumstances cannot be
anticipated. Rather, the goal during this phase, as for the entire treatment strategy, is to enable individuals with persistent pain to develop
a problem-solving perspective where they believe that they have the skills and competencies within their repertoires to respond in an


appropriate way to problems as they arise. In this manner, attempts are made to help him or her to learn to anticipate future difficulties,
develop plans for adaptive responding, and adjust his or her behaviour accordingly.
During the final sessions with individuals being treated for chronic pain, all aspects of the treatment should be reviewed. They should
be engaged in discussions of what they have learned and how they have changed from the onset of treatment and recognition of how their
own efforts contributed to the positive changes. The clinical psychologist also encourages the use of self-monitoring charts to foster self-
reinforcement of accomplishments. The goal is for individual being treated for chronic pain to no longer view themselves as patients but as
competent people who happen to have some physical symptoms and discomfort.

Summary

From the point of view of the individual experiencing it, pain connotes distress and is a plea for assistance. The subjective experience
includes an urge to escape from the cause or, if that is not possible, to obtain relief. It is the overwhelming desire to terminate it that gives
pain its power. Pain has many dimensions, including sensory and affective components, location, intensity, time course and the memories,
meaning and anticipated consequences that it elicits. It has become abundantly clear that no isomorphic relationship exists among tissue
damage, nociception and pain report. The more recent conceptualisations discussed view pain as a perceptual process resulting from the
nociceptive input, which is modulated on a number of different levels in the CNS. In this chapter conceptual models were presented to
explain the subjective experience of pain.
As was noted, the current state of knowledge suggests that pain must be viewed as a complex phenomenon that incorporates physical,
psychosocial and behavioural factors. Failure to incorporate each of these factors will lead to an incomplete understanding. It is wise to recall
John Bonica's comment in the preface to the first edition of his volume, The Management of Pain, and repeated in the second edition some 36
years later:


The crucial role of psychological and environmental factors in causing pain in a significant number of patients only recently received
attention. As a consequence, there has emerged a sketch plan of pain apparatus with its receptors, conducting fibers, and its standard function
that is to be applicable to all circumstances. But ... in so doing, medicine has overlooked the fact that the activity of this apparatus is subject to
a constantly changing influence of the mind.
(Bonica, 1954/1990, p. 12)
Exercises
1. Develop a written diagrammatic formulation of Mary's pain, including predisposing factors, triggers or precipitating factors, personal,
familial, and social perpetuating or maintaining factors, personal resources, including positive coping strategies, family and social
resources.
2. Develop a plan for your first post-assessment session with Mary, including review of the CBT model and how her situation may be seen
within this model.
3. Work in groups of three and assign roles of Mary, the clinical psychologist, and an observer. Role-play a 15-minute segment of a session
with Mary during which you:
a. Introduce her to the idea of relaxation, demonstrate and teach (a part of) a relaxation technique (from Table 3.5 in Chapter 3) and
agree homework with her.
b. Introduce her to a thought record (e.g. a simplified version of the thought record in Table 3.4 in Chapter 3) and identify a
maladaptive thought from a recent pain episode.
c. Work with Mary to look for evidence for and against a maladaptive pain-related thought and generate an alternative thought.
d. Conduct a cost-benefit analysis for the maladaptive and alternative thought.


After the role-plays, debrief. Describe your experience in the various roles. Identify at least three positive specific behavioural aspects of
the clinical psychologist's work with Mary. Identify no more than two specific behavioural ways that the clinical psychologist might act to
improve the session for Mary.
Evidence Summaries
Eccleston, C., Williams, A. C., & Morley, S. (2009). Psychological therapies for the management of chronic pain (excluding headache) in
adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review (2), CD007407.
Glombiewski, J. A., Sawyer, A. T., Gutermann, J., Koenig, K., Rief, W., & Hoffmann, S. G. (2010). Psychological treatments for fibromyalgia:
A meta-analyses. Pain, 171, 280-295.
Henschke, N., Ostelo, R. W., van Tulder, M. W., Vlaeyen, J. W., Morley, S., Assendelft, W. J., & Main, C. J. (2010). Behavioural treatments for
chronic low back pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (7), CD002014.
Hoffman, B. M., Papas, R. K., Chatkoff, D. K., & Kerns, R. D. (2007). Meta-analysis of psychological interventions for low back pain. Health
Psychology, 26(1), 1-9.
Further reading for Practitioners
Gatchel, R., & Turk, D. (2002). Psychological Approaches to Pain Management. A Practitioner's Handbook (Second Edition). New York:
Guilford.
Flor, H., & Turk, D. C. (2011). Chronic Pain: An Integrated Biobehavioural Perspective. Seattle, WA: IASP Press.


Further reading for Clients
Cole, F., Howden-Leach, H., Macdonald, H., & Carus, C. (2005). Overcoming Chronic Pain: A Self-Help Guide Using Cognitive-Behavioural
Techniques. London: Robinson.
Nicholas, M., Molloy, A., Beeston, L., & Torkin, L. (2011). Manage Your Pain: Practical and Positive Ways of Adapting to Chronic Pain.
London: Souvenir Press.
Turk, D., & Winter, F. (2006). The Pain Survival Guide. How to Reclaim your Life. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Training Video
Gatchel, R. (2002). Pain Management. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. www.apa.org
References
Allen, J. P., & Litten, R. Z. (1998). Screening instruments and biochemical screening. In A. W. Graham, T. K. Schultz, & Wilford, B. B. (Eds.),
Principles of Addiction Medicine (pp. 263-272). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Anon. (2007). Top generics based on retail dollar sales. Chain Drug Review, 29, 62.
Apkarian, A. V., Baliki, M. N., & Geha, P. Y. (2009). Towards a theory of chronic pain. Progress in Neurobiology, 87(2), 81-97.


Apkarian, A. V., Hashmi, J. A., & Baliki, M. N. (2011). Pain and the brain: Specificity and plasticity of the brain in clinical chronic pain.
Pain, 152(3 Suppl.), S49-S64.
Asghari, A., & Nicholas, M. K. (2001). Pain self-efficacy beliefs and pain behaviour. A prospective study. Pain, 94, 85-100.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behaviour change. Psychological Review, 84, 191-215.
Banks, S. M., & Kerns, R. D. (1996). Explaining high rates of depression in chronic pain: A diathesis-stress framework. Psychological
Bulletin, 119, 95-110.
Bergner, M., Bobbitt, R., Carter, W., & Gilson, B. (1981). The Sickness Impact Profile: Development and final revision of a health status
measure. Medical Care, 19, 787-805.
Beutler, L., Engle, D., Oro’-Beutler, M., Daldrup, R., & Meredith, K. (1986). Inability to express intense affect: A common link between
depression and pain? Journal of Counselling and Clinical Psychology, 54, 752-759.
Boersma, K., & Linton, S. J. (2006). Psychological processes underlying the development of a chronic pain problem: A prospective study
of the relationship between profiles of psychological variables in the fear-avoidance model in disability. Clinical Journal of Pain, 22, 160-
166.
Boersma, K., Linton, S., Overmeer, T., Jansson, M., Vlaeyen, J., & de Jong, J. (2004). Lowering fear-avoidance and enhancing function
through exposure in vivo: A multiple baseline study across six patients with back pain. Pain, 108, 8–16.
Bonica, J. J. (1954/1990). The Management of Pain (First/Second Editions). Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Febiger.
Boos, N., Rieder, R., Schade, V., Spratt, K. F., Semmer, N., & Aebi, M. (1995). The diagnostic accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging, work
perception, and psychosocial factors in identifying symptomatic disc herniations. Spine, 20, 2613-2625.
Boothby, J. L., Thorn, B. E., Stroud, M. W., & Jensen, M. P. (1999). Coping with pain. In R. J. Gatchel & D. C. Turk (Eds.), Psychosocial Factors
in Pain: Critical Perspectives (pp. 243-259). New York: Guilford.


Brown, G. K., & Nicassio, P. M. (1987). Development of a questionnaire for the assessment of active and passive coping strategies in
chronic pain patients. Pain, 31, 53-63.
Buenaver, L. F., Campbell, C. M., & Haythornthwaite, J. A. (2010). Cognitive behavioural therapy for chronic pain. In S. M. Fishman, J. C.
Ballantyne, & J. P. Rathmell (Eds.), Bonica's Management of Pain (pp. 1220-1230). Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer.
Burns, J. W. (1997). Anger management style and hostility: Predicting symptom-specific physiological reactivity among chronic low
back pain patients. Journal of Behavioural Medicine, 20, 505-522.
Burns, J. W., Kubilus, A., Bruehl, S., Harden, R. N., & Lofland, K. (2003). Do changes in cognitive factors influence outcome following
multidisciplinary treatment for chronic pain? A cross-lagged panel analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 81-91.
Cacioppo, J. T., Bernston, G. G., Klein, D. J., & Poehlmann, K. M. (1997). The psychophysiology of emotion across the lifespan. Annual
Review of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 17, 27-74.
Carragee, E. J. (2005). Clinical practice. Persistent low back pain. New England Journal of Medicine, 352(18), 1891-1898.
Carragee, E. J., Alamin, T. F., Miller, J. L., & Carragee, J. M. (2005). Discographic, MRA and psychosocial determinants of low back pain
disability and remission: a prospective study in subjects with benign persistent back pain. Spine Journal, 5(1), 24-35.
Chan, B.K.B., Tam, L.K.W., Chun, Y., Chung, Y. F., Tsui, S. L., & Cheung, C. W. (2011). Opioids in chronic non-cancer pain. Expert Opinion on
Pharmacotherapy, 12, 705-20.
Chan, C. W., & Peng, P. (2011). Failed back surgery syndrome. Pain Medicine, 12(4), 577-606.
Corbishley, M., Hendrickson, R., Beutler, L., & Engle, D. (1990). Behaviour, affect, and cognition among psychogenic pain patients in
group expressive psychotherapy. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 5, 241-248.
Council, J., Ahern, D., Follick, M., & Cline, C. L. (1988). Expectancies and functional impairment in chronic low back pain. Pain 33, 323-
331.


Craig, K. D. (1986). Social modelling influences: Pain in context. In R. A. Sternbach (Ed.), The Psychology of Pain (Second Edition, pp. 67-
95). New York: Raven Press.
DeGood, D. E., & Tait, R. (2001). Assessment of pain beliefs, coping, and self-efficacy. In D. C. Turk & R. Melzack (Eds.), Handbook of Pain
Assessment (Second Edition, pp. 320-345). New York: Guilford Press.
de Jong, J. R., Vlaeyen, J.W.S., Onghena, P., Cuypers, C., den Hollander, M., & Ruijgrok, J. (2005). Reduction of pain-related fear in complex
regional pain syndrome type I: The application of graded exposure in vivo. Pain, 116, 264-275.
Derogatis, L. (1983). The SCL-90R Manual-II: Administration, Scoring and Procedures. Towson, MD: Clinical Psychometric Research.
Dersh, J., Gatchel, R. J., Mayer, T. G., Polatin, P. B., & Temple, O. W. (2006). Prevalence of psychiatric disorders in patients with chronic
disabling occupational spinal disorders. Spine, 31, 1156-1162.
Deyo, R. A. (1986). Early diagnostic evaluation of low back pain. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 1, 328-38.
Deyo, R. A., & Mirza, S. K. (2009). The case for restraint in spinal surgery: Does quality management have a role to play? European Spine
Journal, 18(Suppl. 3), 331-337.
Dolce, J. J., Crocker, M. F., Moletteire, C., & Doleys, D. M. (1986). Exercise quotas, anticipatory concern, and self-efficacy expectations in
chronic pain: A preliminary report. Pain, 24, 365-372.
Eccleston, C., Palermo, T. M., Williams, A. C., Lewandowski, A., & Morley, S. (2009). Psychological therapies for the management of
chronic and recurrent pain in children and adolescents. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (12), CD003968.
Eccleston, C., Williams, A. C., & Morley, S. (2009). Psychological therapies for the management of chronic pain (excluding headache) in
adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (2), CD007407.
Edwards, L. C., Pearce, S. A., Turner-Stokes, L., & Jones, A. (1992). The Pain Beliefs Questionnaire: An investigation of beliefs in the causes
and consequences of pain. Pain, 51, 267-272.


Englund, M., Guermazi, A., Gale, D., Hunter, D. J., Aliabadi, P., Clancy, M., & Felson, D. T. (2008). Incidental meniscal findings on knee MRI
in middle-aged and elderly persons. New England Journal of Medicine, 359, 1108-15.
Fairbank, J. C., Couper, J., Davies, J. B., & O'Brien, J. P. (1980). The Oswestry low back pain disability questionnaire. Physiotherapy, 66, 271-
273.
Fernandez, E., & Turk, D. C. (1989). The utility of cognitive coping strategies for altering pain perception: A meta-analysis. Pain, 38, 125-
135.
Fernandez, E., & Turk, D. C. (1995). The scope and significance of anger in the experience of chronic pain. Pain, 61, 165-175.
Finan, P. H., Buenaver, L. F., Bounds, S. C., Hussain, S., Park, R. J., Haque, U. J., Smith, M. T. (2013). Discordance between pain
and radiographic severity in knee osteoarthritis: Findings from quantitative sensory testing of central sensitization. Arthritis and
Rheumatology, 65(2): 363-372.
First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5). Clinical Version.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Press.
Fishbain, D. A., Cutler, R., Rosomoff, H. L., & Rosomoff, R. S. (1997). Chronic pain-associated depression: Antecedent or consequence of
chronic pain? A review. Clinical Journal of Pain, 13(2), 116-137.
Flor, H., & Turk, D. C. (2011). Chronic Pain: An Integrated Biobehavioural Perspective. Seattle, WA: IASP Press.
Fordyce, W. E. (1976). Behavioural Methods in Chronic Pain and Illness. St Louis, MO: Mosby.
Fordyce, W. E., Fowler, R. S., Jr, Lehmann, J. F., Delateur, B. J., Sand, P. L., & Trieschmann, R. B. (1973). Operant conditioning in the
treatment of chronic pain. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 54(9), 399-408.
Furlan, A. D., Sandoval, J. A., Mailis-Gagnon, A., & Tunks, E. (2006). Opioids for chronic non-cancer pain: a meta-analysis of effectiveness
and side effects. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 174, 1589-94.


Galer, B. S., & Jensen, M. P. (1997). Development and preliminary validation of a pain measure specific to neuropathic pain: The
Neuropathic Pain Scale. Neurology, 48, 332-338.
Gaston-Johansson, F. (1996). Measurement of pain: The psychometric properties of the Pain O'Meter, a simple, inexpensive pain
assessment tool that could change health care practice. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 12, 172-181.
Gatchel, R. J. (2005). Clinical Essentials of Pain Management. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Gatchel, R. J., McGeary, D. D., McGeary, C. A., & Lippe, B. (2014). Interdisciplinary chronic pain management: Past, present, and future.
American Psychologist, 69, 119-130.
Gatchel, R. J., Peng, Y. B., Peters, M. L., Fuchs, P. N., & Turk, D. C. (2007). The Biopsychosocial approach to chronic pain: Scientific advances
and future directions. Psychological Bulletin, 133(4), 581-624.
Gilron, I., Bailey, J. M., Tu, D., Holden, R. R., Weaver, D. F., & Houlden, R. L. (2005). Morphine, gabapentin, or their combination for
neuropathic pain. New England Journal of Medicine, 352(13): 1324-1334.
Goubert, L., Vlaeyen, J. W., Crombez, G., & Craig, K. D. (2011). Learning about pain from others: An observational learning account.
Journal of Pain, 12(2), 167-174.
Gracley, R. H., & Kwilosz, D. M. (1988). The Descriptor Differential Scale: Applying psychophysical principles to clinical pain assessment.
Pain, 35, 279-288.
Granot, M., & Ferber, S. G. (2005). The roles of pain catastrophizing and anxiety in the prediction of postoperative pain intensity: A
prospective study. Clinical Journal of Pain, 21, 439-445.
Greene, R. (2010). MMPI-2/MMPI-2 RF Interpretive Manual (Third Edition). New York: Pearson.
Grzesiak, R. C., Ury, G. M., & Dworkin, R. H. (1996). Psychodynamic psychotherapy with chronic pain patients. In R. J. Gatchel & D. C. Turk
(Eds.), Psychological Approaches to Pain Management: A Practitioner's Handbook (pp. 148-178). New York: Guilford Press.


Henschke, N., Ostelo, R. W., van Tulder, M. W., Vlaeyen, J. W., Morley, S., Assendelft, W. J., & Main, C. J. (2010). Behavioural treatment for
chronic low-back pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (7), CD002014.
Hing, E., Cherry, D. K., & Woodwell, D. A. (2005). National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2004 Summary. Advance Data from Vital and
Health Statistics No. 374. Hyattsville, MD: National Centre for Health Statistics.
Hoffman, B. M., Papas, R. K., Chatkoff, D. K., & Kerns, R. D. (2007). Meta-analysis of psychological interventions for chronic low back pain.
Health Psychology, 26(1), 1-9.
Hunt, D. G., Zuberbier, O. A., Kozolowski, A. J., Robinson, J., Berkowitz, J., Schultz, I. Z., ... Turk, D. C. (2001). Reliability of the lumbar
flexion, lumbar extension, and passive straight leg raise test in normal populations embedded within a complete physical examination.
Spine, 26(24), 2714-2718.
Jarvik, J. G., Hollingworth, W., Heagerty, P. J., Haynor, D. R., Boyki, E. J., & Deyo, R. A. (2005). Three-year incidence of low back pain in an
initially asymptomatic cohort: clinical and imaging risk factors. Spine, 30(13), 1541-1548.
Jensen, M. C., Brant-Zawadzki, M., Obuchowski, N., Modic, M. T., & Malkasian Ross, J. S. (1994). Magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar
spine in people without back pain. New England Journal of Medicine, 331, 69-73.
Jensen, M. P. (2010). A neuropsychological model of pain: Research and clinical implications. Journal of Pain, 11(1), 2-12.
Jensen, M. P., Barber, J., Romano, J. M., Hanley, M. A., Raichle, K. A., Molton, I. R., ... Patterson, D. R. (2009). Effects of self-hypnosis
training and EMG biofeedback relaxation training on chronic pain in persons with spinal cord injury. International Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Hypnosis, 57(3), 239-268.
Jensen, M. P., Karoly, P., & Huger, R. (1987). The development and preliminary validation of an instrument to assess patient's attitudes
toward pain. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 31, 393-400.
Jensen, M. P., Romano, J. M., Turner, J. A., Good, A. B., & Wald, L. H. (1999). Patient beliefs predict patient functioning: Further support for
a cognitive-behavioural model of chronic pain. Pain, 81, 95-104.


Jensen, M. P., & Turk, D. C. (2014). Contributions of psychology to the understanding and treatment of people with chronic pain: Why it
matters to ALL psychologists. American Psychologist, 69(2), 105-118.
Jensen, M. P., Turner, J. A., & Romano, J. M. (1994). Correlates of improvement in multidisciplinary treatment of chronic pain. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 172-179.
Jensen, M. P., Turner, J. A., Romano, J. M., & Strom, S. E. (1995). The Chronic Pain Coping Inventory: Development and preliminary
validation. Pain, 60, 203-216.
Johannes, C. B., Le, T. K., Zhou, X., Johnston, J. A., & Dworkin, R. H. (2011). The prevalence of chronic pain in United States adults: Results
of an Internet-based survey. Journal of Pain, 11(11), 1230-1239.
Kames, L. D., Naliboff, B. D., Heinrich, R. L., & Schag, C. C. (1984). The Chronic Illness Problem Inventory: Problem-oriented psychosocial
assessment of patients with chronic illness. International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 14, 65-75.
Kaufman, D. W., Kelly, J. P., Rosenberg, L., Anderson, T. E., & Mitchell, A. A. (2002). Recent patterns of medication use in the ambulatory
adult population in the United States. Journal of the American Medical Association, 287, 337-344.
Keefe, F. J., Rumble, M. E., Scipio, C. D., Giordano, L. A., & Perri, L. M. (2004). Psychological aspects of persistent pain: Current state of the
science. Journal of Pain, 5, 195-211.
Keith, R. A., Granger, C. V., Hamilton, B. B., & Sherwin, F. S. (1987). The Functional Independence Measure: A new tool for rehabilitation.
In M. G. Eisenberg (Ed.), Advances in Clinical Rehabilitation (pp. 6-18). New York: Springer.
Kelly, J. P., Cook, S. F., Kaufman, D. W., Anderson, T., Rosenberg, L., & Mitchell, A. A. (2008). Prevalence and characteristics of opioid use in
the US adult population. Pain, 138, 507-513.
Kerns, R. D., Rosenberg, R., & Jacob, M. (1994). Anger expression and chronic pain. Journal of Behavioural Medicine, 17, 57-67.
Kerns, R. D. Rosenberg, R., Jamison, R. N., Caudill, M. A., & Haythornthwaite, J. (1997). Readiness to adopt a self-management approach
to chronic pain: The Pain Stages of Change Questionnaire (PSOCQ). Pain, 72, 227-234.


Kerns, R. D., Turk, D. C., & Rudy, T. E. (1985). The West HavenYale Multidimensional Pain Inventory (WHYMPI). Pain, 23, 345356.
Kroenke, K., & Mangelsdorff, A. (1989). Common symptoms in ambulatory care: Incidence, evaluation, therapy, and outcome. American
Journal of Medicine, 86, 262-266.
Leeuw, M., Goossens, M. E., van Breukelen, G. J., de Jong, J. R., Heuts, P. H., Smeets, R. J., & Vlaeyen, J. W. (2008). Exposure in vivo versus
operant graded activity in chronic low back pain patients: Results of a randomized controlled trial. Pain, 138(1), 192-207.
Lenthem, J., Slade, P. O., Troup, J.P.G., & Bentley, G. (1983). Outline of a fearavoidance model of exaggerated pain perception. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 21, 401408.
Liebeskind, J. C. (1991). Pain can kill. Pain, 44, 3-4.
Linton, S. J., & Buer, N. (1995). Working despite pain: Factors associated with work attendance versus dysfunction. International Journal
of Behavioural Medicine, 2, 252-262.
Loeser, J. D., Butler, S. D., Chapman, C. R., & Turk, D. C. (Eds.). (2001). Bonica's Management of Pain (Third Edition). Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Macea, D. D., Gajos, K., Daglia Calil, Y. A., & Fregni, F. (2010). The efficacy of Web-based cognitive-behavioural interventions for chronic
pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Pain, 11(10), 917-929.
Marks, R. (2001). Efficacy theory and its utility in arthritis rehabilitation: Review and recommendations. Disability and Rehabilitation,
23, 271-280.
Mayfield, D., McLead, G., & Hall, P. (1987). The CAGE questionnaire. American Journal of Psychiatry, 131, 1121-1123.
McCracken, L. M., Zayfert, C., & Gross, R. T. (1992). The Pain Anxiety Symptoms Scale: Development and validation of a scale to measure
fear of pain. Pain, 50, 67-73.
McNeil, D. W., & Rainwater, A. J. III. (1998). Development of the Fear of Pain Questionnaire-III. Journal of Behavioural Medicine, 21, 389-
410.


Melnikova, I. (2010). Pain market. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 9, 589-590.
Melzack, R. (1975). The McGill Pain Questionnaire: Major properties and scoring methods. Pain, 1, 277-299.
Melzack, R. (1999). Pain—an overview. Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica, 43(9), 880-884.
Melzack, R., & Wall, P. D. (1965). Pain mechanisms: A new theory. Science, 150, 971-979.
Mendelson, G. (1982). Not "cured by a verdict." Medical Journal of Australia, 2, 132-134.
Merskey, H. (1986). International Association for the Study of Pain: Classification of chronic pain. Descriptions of chronic pain
syndromes and definitions of pain terms. Pain, 3, S1-S226.
Millon, T., Green, C., & Meagher, R. (1983). Millon Behavioural Health Inventory Manual (Third Edition). Minneapolis, MD: National
Computer Systems.
Moore, R. A., Derry, S., & Wiffen, P. J. (2013). Challenges in design and interpretation of chronic pain trials. British Journal of Anaesthesia,
111(1), 38-45.
Morley, S. (2011). Efficacy and effectiveness of cognitive behaviour therapy for chronic pain: Progress and some challenges. Pain, 152(3,
Suppl.), S99-S106.
Morley, S., Eccleston, C., & Williams, A. (1999). Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of cognitive-
behaviour therapy and behaviour therapy for chronic pain in adults, excluding headache. Pain, 80, 1-13.
Murray, C.J.L., Abraham, J., Ali, M. K., Alvarado, M., Atkinson, C., Baddour, L. M., ... Lopez, A. D. (2013). The state of US health, 1990-2010:
Burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. Journal of the American Medical Association, 310(6), 591-608.
Murray, E., Burns, J., See, T. S., Lai, R., & Nazareth, I. (2005). Interactive Health Communication Applications for people with chronic
disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (4), CD004274.
National Centre for Health Statistics. (2006). Health, United States, 2006 with Chart Book on Trends in the Health of Americans. Hyattsville,
MD: Author.


Naylor, M. R., Naud, S., Keefe, F. J., & Helzer, J. E. (2010). Therapeutic Interactive Voice Response (TIVR) to reduce analgesic medication use
for chronic pain management. Journal of Pain, 11(12), 1410-1419.
Okifuji, A., Turk, D. C., & Curran, S. L. (1999). Anger in chronic pain: Investigation of anger targets and intensity. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 47(1), 1-12.
Okifuji, A., Turk, D. C., & Sherman, J. J. (2000). Evaluation of the relationship between depression and fibromyalgia syndrome: Why
aren't all patients depressed? Journal of Rheumatology, 27, 212-219.
Ostelo, R. W., van Tulder, M. W., Vlaeyen, J. W., Linton, S. J., Morley, S. J., & Assendelft, W. J. (2005). Behavioural treatment for chronic low-
back pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (1), CD002014.
Palermo, T. M., Eccleston, C., Lewandowski, A. S., Williams, A. C., & Morley, S. (2010). Randomized controlled trials of psychological
therapies for management of chronic pain in children and adolescents: An updated meta-analytic review. Pain, 148(3), 387-397.
Palermo, T. M., Wilson, A. C., Peters, M., Lewandowski, A., & Somhegyi, H. (2009). Randomized controlled trial of an Internet-delivered
family cognitive-behavioural therapy intervention for children and adolescents with chronic pain. Pain, 146(1-2), 205-213.
Patel, K., Dansie, E., & Turk, D. C. (2013). Impact of chronic musculoskeletal pain on objectively measured daily physical activity: Current
findings and applications in clinical practice. Pain Management, 14(6), 467-474.
Paulose-Ram, R., Hirsch, R., & Dillon, C. (2003). Prescription and non-prescription analgesic use among the US adult population: Results
from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III). Pharmacoepidemiology Drug Safety, 112, 15-26.
Perquin, C. W., Hazebroek-Kampschreur, A. A., Hunfeld, J. A., Bohnen, A. M., van Suijlekom-Smit, L. W., Passchier, J., & van der Wouden, J.
C. (2000). Pain in children and adolescents: A common experience. Pain, 87(1), 51-58.
Pilowsky, I., & Spence, N. (1976). Pain, anger, and illness behaviour. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 20, 411-416.
Piotrowski, C. (2007). Review of the psychological literature on assessment instruments used with pain patients. North American Journal
of Psychology, 9, 303-306.


Pizzo, P. A., Clark, N. M., Carter-Pokras, N. M., Christopher, M., Farrar, J. T., Follett, K. A., ... Zeltzer, L. (2011). Relieving Pain in America: A
Blueprint for Transforming Prevention, Care, Education, and Research. Committee on Advancing Pain Research, Care, and Education, Institute
of Medicine. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Pleis, J. R., & Lucas, J. W. (2009). Summary health statistics for US adults: National Health Interview Survey, 2007. National Centre for
Health Statistics Vital and Health Statistics Series, 10(240), 1–160.
Pollard, C. A. (1984). Preliminary validity study of the Pain Disability Index. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 59, 974.
Richard, K. (1988). The occurrence of maladaptive health-related behaviours and teacher-related conduct problems in children of
chronic low back pain patients. Journal of Behavioural Medicine, 11, 107-116.
Riskowski, J. L. (2014). Associations of socioeconomic position and pain prevalence in the United States: Findings from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Pain Medicine, 15(9), 1508-21.
Rosenstiel, A. K., & Keefe, F. J. (1983). The use of coping strategies in chronic low back pain patients: Relationship to patient
characteristics and current adjustment. Pain, 17, 33-44.
Rudy, T. E., Kerns, R. D., & Turk, D. C. (1988). Chronic pain and depression: Toward a cognitive-behavioural mediational model. Pain, 35,
129-140.
Ruehlman, L. S., Karoly, P., & Enders, C. (2012). A randomized controlled evaluation of an online chronic pain self-management program.
Pain, 153, 319-330.
Schappert, S. M. (1998). Ambulatory care visits to physicians' offices, hospital outpatient departments, and emergency departments:
United States, 1996. Vital and Health Statistics, Series 13, 134, 1–80.
Schwartz, L., Slater, M., Birchler, G., & Atkinson, J. H. (1991). Depression in spouses of chronic pain patients: The role of patient pain and
anger, and marital satisfaction. Pain, 44, 61-67.


Seminowicz, D. A., & Davis, K. D. (2006). Cortical responses to pain in healthy individuals depends on pain catastrophizing. Pain, 120(3),
297-306.
Severeijns, R., Vlaeyen, J. W., van den Hout, M. A., & Picavet, H. S. (2005). Pain catastrophizing and consequences of musculoskeletal pain:
A prospective study in the Dutch community. Journal of Pain, 6, 125-132.
Smeets, R.J.E.M., Vlaeyen, J.W.S., Kester, A.D.M., & Knottnerus, J. A. (2006). Reduction of pain catastrophizing mediates the outcome of
both physical and cognitive-behavioural treatment of chronic low back pain. Journal of Pain, 7, 261-271.
Smith, B. H., Elliott, A. M., & Hannaford, P. C. (2004). Is chronic pain a distinct diagnosis in primary care? Evidence arising from the Royal
College of General Practitioners' Oral Contraception Study. Family Practice, 21, 66-74.
Smith, C. A., Wallston, K. A., Dwyer, K. A., & Dowdy, S. W. (1997). Beyond good and bad coping: A multidimensional examination of
coping with pain in persons with rheumatoid arthritis. Annals of Behavioural Medicine, 19, 11-21.
Spiegel, D., & Bloom, J. R. (1983). Pain in metastatic breast cancer. Cancer, 52, 341-345.
Stewart, W. F., Lipton, R. B., Whyte, J., Kolodner, K., Liberman, J. N., & Sawyer, J. (1999). An international study to assess reliability of the
Migraine Disability Assessment (MIDAS) score. Neurology, 53, 988-994.
Sullivan, M.J.L., Bishop, S., & Pivik, J. (1995). The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: Development and validation. Psychological Assessment, 7,
524-532.
Sullivan, M.J.L., Thorn, B., Haythornthwaite, J. A., Keefe, F., Martin, M., Bradley, L. A., & Lefebvre, J. C. (2001). Theoretical perspectives on
the relation between catastrophizing and pain. Clinical Journal of Pain, 15, 52-64.
Summers, J. D., Rapoff, M. A., Varghese, G., Porter, K., & Palmer, R. E. (1991). Psychosocial factors in chronic spinal cord injury pain. Pain,
47, 183-189.
Thorn, B. E., Rich, M. A., & Boothby, J. L. (1999). Pain beliefs and coping attempts. Pain Forum, 8, 169-171.


Thorsell, J., Finnes, A., Dahl, J., Lundgren, T., Gybrant, M., Gordh, T., & Buhrman, M. (2011). A comparative study of 2 manual-based self-
help interventions, acceptance and commitment therapy and applied relaxation for persons with chronic pain. Clinical Journal of Pain,
27(8), 716-723.
Tota-Faucette, M. E., Gil, K. M., Williams, D. A., Keefe, F. J., & Goli, V. (1993): Predictors of response to pain management treatment. The
role of family environment and changes in cognitive processes. Clinical Journal of Pain, 9, 115-123.
Tsang, A., Von Korff, M., Lee, S., Alonso, J., Karam, E., Angermeyer, M. C., ... Watanabe, M. (2008). Common chronic pain conditions in
developed and developing countries: Gender and age differences and comorbidity with depression-anxiety disorders. Journal of Pain, 9,
883-891.
Turk, D. C. (1996). Biopsychosocial perspective on chronic pain. In R. J. Gatchel & D. C. Turk (Eds.), Psychological Approaches to Pain
Management: A Practitioner's Handbook (pp. 3-30). New York: Guilford Press.
Turk, D. C. (1997). Psychological aspects of pain. In P. Bakule (Ed.), Expert Pain Management (pp. 124-178). Springhouse, PA: Springhouse
Corp.
Turk, D. C. (2002a). Clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness of treatments for chronic pain patients. Clinical Journal of Pain, 18, 355-
365.
Turk, D. C. (2002b). A cognitive-behavioural perspective on treatment of chronic pain patients. In D. C. Turk & R. J. Gatchel (Eds.),
Psychological Approaches to Pain Management: A Practitioner's Handbook (Second Edition, pp. 138-158). New York: Guilford Press.
Turk, D. C., & Flor, H. (1999). Chronic pain: A biobehavioural perspective. In R. J. Gatchel & D. C. Turk (Eds.), Psychosocial Factors in Pain:
Critical Perspectives (pp. 18-34). New York: Guilford Press.
Turk, D. C., & Flor, H. (2013). Cognitive-behavioural approach to pain management. In: S. McMahon, M. Koltzenburg, I. Tracey, & D. C.
Turk (Eds.), Wall and Melzack's Textbook of Pain (Sixth Edition, pp. 592-602). London: Elsevier.


Turk, D. C., & Meichenbaum (1984). A cognitive-behavioural approach to pain management. In P. D. Wall & R. Melzack (Eds.), Textbook of
Pain (pp. 787-794). New York: Churchill-Livingstone.
Turk, D. C., Meichenbaum, D., & Genest, M. (1983). Pain and Behavioural Medicine: A Cognitive-Behavioural Perspective. New York:
Guilford.
Turk, D. C., & Melzack, R. (1992). Handbook of Pain Assessment. New York: Guilford Press.
Turk, D. C., & Melzack, R. (2001). Handbook of Pain Assessment (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Turk, D. C., & Melzack, R. (2010). Handbook of Pain Assessment. (Third Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Turk, D. C., & Okifuji, A. (1997). What factors affect physicians' decisions to prescribe opioids for chronic non-cancer pain patients?
Clinical Journal of Pain, 13, 330-336.
Turk, D. C., Okifuji, A., & Scharff, L. (1995). Chronic pain and depression: Role of perceived impact and perceived control in different age
cohorts. Pain, 61, 93-101.
Turk, D. C., Okifuji, A., & Skinner, M. (2008). Assessment of the person with persistent pain. In K. Hunsley & E. Mash (Eds.), A Guide to
Assessments that Work (pp. 576-592). New York: Oxford Press.
Turk, D. C., Swanson, K. S., & Gatchel, R. J. (2008). Predicting opioid misuse by chronic pain patients: A systematic review and literature
synthesis. Clinical Journal of Pain, 24(6), 497-508.
Turk, D. C., Swanson, K., & Tunks, E. (2008). Psychological approaches in the treatment of chronic pain patients-when pills, scalpels,
and needles are not enough. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 53(4), 213-223.
Turk, D. C., Wack, J. T., & Kerns, R. D. (1985). An empirical examination of the "pain behaviour" construct. Journal of Behavioural
Medicine, 9, 119-130.
Turk, D. C., Wilson, H. D., & Cahana, A. (2011). Treatment of chronic noncancer pain. Lancet, 377 (9784), 2226-2235.


Turk, D. C., Wilson, H. D., & Swanson, K. S. (2011). The biopsychosocial model of pain and pain management. In M. Ebert & R. D. Kerns
(Eds.), Behavioural and pharmacological pain management (pp. 16-43). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Turkat, I. D., & Pettegrew, L. S. (1983). Development and validation of the Illness Behaviour Inventory. Journal of Behavioural Assessment,
5, 35-47.
van den Berg-Emons, R. J., Schasfoort, F. C., de Vos, L. A., Bussman, J. B., & Stam, H. J. (2007). Impact of chronic pain on everyday physical
activity. European Journal of Pain, 11(5), 587-593.
Vaughan, K. B., & Lanzetta, J. T. (1980). Vicarious instigation and conditioning of facial expressive and autonomic responses to a model's
expressive display of pain. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 909923.
Vlaeyen, J. W., de Jong, J., Geilen, M., Heuts, P. H., & van Breukelen, G. (2002). The treatment of fear of movement/(re)injury in chronic low
back pain: Further evidence on the effectiveness of exposure in vivo. Clinical Journal of Pain, 18, 251-261.
Vlaeyen, J. W., Kole-Snijders, A. M., Boeren, R. B., et al. (1995). Fear of movement/(re)injury in chronic low back pain and its relation to
behavioural performance. Pain, 62, 363-372.
Vlaeyen, J.W.S., & Linton, S. J. (2012). Fear-avoidance model of chronic musculoskeletal pain: 12 years on. Pain, 153, 144-1147.
Volkow, N. D., McLellan, T. A., Cotto, J. H., Karithanom, M., & Weiss, S.R.B. (2011). Characteristics of opioid prescriptions in 2009. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 305, 1299-1301.
Waddell, G., Newton, M., Henderson, I., Somerville, D., & Main, C. J. (1993). A Fear-Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire (FABQ) and the role
of fear-avoidance beliefs in chronic low back pain and disability. Pain, 52, 157-168.
Wallis, B. J., Lord, S. M., & Bogduk, N. (1997). Resolution of psychological distress of whiplash patients following treatment by
radiofrequency neurotomy: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Pain, 73, 15-22.
Ware, J. E., & Sherbourne, C. D. (1992). The MOS 36-item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36). Medical Care, 30, 473-481.


Webb, T. L., Joseph, J., Yardley, L., & Mitchie, S. (2010). Using the internet to promote health behaviour change: A systematic review and
meta-analysis of the impact of theoretical basis, use of behaviour change techniques, and mode of delivery on efficacy. Journal of Medical
Internet Research, 12(1), e4.
White, D. K., Tudor-Locke, C., Felson, D. T., Gross, K. D., Niu, J., Nevitt, M., ... Neogi, T. (2013). Do radiographic disease and pain account for
why people with or at high risk of knee osteoarthritis do not meet physical activity guidelines? Arthritis and Rheumatology, 65(1), 139-
147.
Williams, A. C., Eccleston, C., & Morley, S. (2012). Psychological therapies for the management of chronic pain (excluding headache) in
adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (2), CD007407.
Williams, D. A., & Thorn, B. E. (1989). An empirical assessment of pain beliefs. Pain, 36, 351-358.
Woby, S. R., Watson, P. J., Roach, N. K., & Urmston, M. (2005). Coping strategy use: Does it predict adjustment to chronic back pain after
controlling for catastrophic thinking and self-efficacy for pain control? Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine, 37, 100-107.
Woolf, C. J. (2007). Central sensitization: Uncovering the relation between pain and plasticity. Anesthesiology, 106(4), 864-867.
World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic
Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.


Chapter 21 Psychological Assessment and Treatment in Cancer Care
Craig White
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-21
Case Example
Joe was a 42-year-old man with advanced metastatic cancer who was referred to the author for opinion on managing panic and anxiety. He
was an inpatient within the local hospice and his anxiety had been managed with benzodiazepines (midazolam delivered in syringe driver).
He had been reviewed by a consultant psychiatrist who had recommended the addition of amitriptyline at night. The duration of assessment
was limited due to his physical health status but concentrated on review of his nursing notes, discussion with several members of nursing
staff and discussion with him about a recent problem episode. Information was collected on all his recent and current medication. He was
encouraged to talk about his thoughts and feelings when experiencing panic and asked about the presence of any images when experiencing
this. Information was collected on his family and personal support, and his sisters were interviewed. He talked about a distressing image
when he had been at home on the day of his father's death. Staff were encouraged to assess the personal significance of this in further detail.


Introduction
This chapter will outline information that can be used to assist with the phases of assessment, formulation and intervention with common
psychological problems and disorders that are experienced among people who have been diagnosed with cancer. The chapter is structured
using these headings, reflecting as they do the sequential phases that are generally applied by clinical psychologists in their approach to
clinical practice. These sections will be presented after an initial overview of cancer and its treatment and the psychosocial impact of cancer.
The emphasis in this chapter will be on those elements of clinical practice that are particular to the psychological assessment, formulation
and psychological care of people living with cancer. The content and clinical processes that are covered within other chapters will also be
of relevance in considering the needs of those who present for psychological assessment and therapy relating to their experience of and
adjustment to cancer.
Epidemiology of Psychological Problems Among Cancer Patients
Cancer is a generic term that relates to over 200 different diseases, each characterised by a process where cells develop and grow in an
unregulated manner, forming a tumour. Tumours invade surrounding normal tissues and often spread to other organs within the body.
Cancer is a major cause of morbidity in the UK. There are more than 200 types of cancer, each with different causes, symptoms and
treatments. Approximately 910 people every day in the UK are told that they have cancer. Breast, lung, prostate and bowel cancers account
for over half of all of the new cancer diagnoses each year (Cancer Research UK, 2015). The main treatment modalities for cancer are surgery,
chemotherapy, immunotherapy, radiotherapy and hormone therapy. Because cancer refers to a range of illnesses and diseases, each with a
different aetiology, treatment regime and prognosis, it is therefore often associated with unique psychological concerns or problems.


Consider a patient who has experienced breast cancer in the context of adequate personal and supportive care resources, and who has
received care and treatment without major problems with side effects. She will have experienced an entirely different set of thoughts and
feelings as opposed to a patient with head and neck cancer with few supportive relationships and a past history of alcohol misuse. Such
differences in psychological experiences would become more apparent if the latter patient had also experienced a range of disfiguring
surgical treatments and was been told that their overall treatment was no longer curative. As is the case with all physical illnesses, the
psychological variability between patients with very similar illness characteristics can be significant. These two contrasting examples
highlight that with cancer in particular there are very different psychological issues that confront people depending upon the primary site of
their cancer, the extent of spread, treatment intent, and side effects of treatment. Past life history and current personal and social resources
are also very likely to have a bearing upon the precise interaction between cancer and the person with cancer.
Increasing medical advances have meant that more people are cured of cancer than ever before. As a consequence, people with cancer are
now tending to live longer than used to be the case (even when cancer treatment is being given without curative intent). These changing
circumstances mean cancer is increasingly being conceptualised as a long-term condition. Almost everyone who is told that they have
cancer will experience a period of shock and psychological distress. For the majority of people, this will be a self-limiting experience, one
which does not cause any lasting psychological problems and which can be understood as part of a normal adjustment reaction. Some people
will experience more severe distress. Currently available estimates suggest that this severity of distress will apply to around 25% of people
who have cancer (Derogatis et al., 1983), though there are some cancer sites where this figure is higher (Zabora et al., 2001). Patients with
this level of distress are more likely to be experiencing psychological problems that significantly interfere with their quality of life and ability
to function on a day-to-day basis. Distress is more common in younger patients; patients who are single by virtue of separation, divorce or
being widowed; patients living alone; patients with children under 21 years of age; patients experiencing economic adversity, perceived lack
of social support, poor marital or family functioning; and people with a history of psychiatric problems who have experienced cumulative

stressful life events and a history of alcohol or other substance misuse. Being younger or of lower educational attainment, tumour visibility,
and lack of social support continue to be cited as risk factors for psychological distress (Kasparian et al., 2009)
More severe distress is more likely at the time of diagnosis or recurrence, at advanced stages of cancer, in the presence of a poorer prognosis
and when someone is experiencing more treatment side effects. The presence of symptoms such as lymphedema, pain or fatigue also
increases the risk of such distress (National Breast Cancer Centre and National Cancer Control Initiative, 2003). Greater levels of distress may
be present among men (whether they have the cancer themselves or are in a caring role) (Goldzweig et al., 2009).
Clinically significant psychological problems usually occur as part of an adjustment disorder, major depressive disorder or one of the
anxiety disorders (White & Macleod, 2003). Although incidence figures vary in accordance with the way in which symptoms are assessed,
it is thought that around 10-15% of patients will experience a significant depressive episode that is triggered by cancer. There has been an
increased interest in viewing cancer as a trigger for post-traumatic stress symptoms (Smith et al., 1999). Although prevalence estimates
have tended to depend upon the assessment methodologies used, it is thought that 5-19% of people with cancer experience symptoms that
meet the criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) approximately 6 months after diagnosis and 3-22% in terms of lifetime diagnosis
(Kangas et al., 2002). More commonly people experience symptoms such as intrusive thoughts, avoidance of reminders and hypervigilance
(Jim & Jacobsen, 2008).
The precise figures also differ in accordance with the way in which the diagnosis is made. Many patients have to face treatment regimes
that are difficult to tolerate, and which require frequent hospital visits and levels of motivation that can be difficult to generate or sustain.
Some patients will experience anxiety, depression or trauma symptoms that although not experienced at sufficient severity to warrant a
diagnosis, can cause problems. Indeed, non-physical treatment side effects such as anger, anxiety or apprehension are often rated by patients
as being more severe than physical side effects such as nausea or hair loss (Coates et al., 1983). Some patients may drop out of chemotherapy
because of psychological problems (Gilbar & De-Nour, 1989; Watson, 2000). Some treatment procedures (e.g. bone marrow transplantation)
result in psychological problems because of the particular demands that they involve (e.g. prolonged exposure to isolation). Chemotherapy

is more challenging for patients with fears of needles, and radiotherapy can be distressing for people that have fears of enclosed places.
Advances in drug therapies have resulted in a reduction in the incidence of nausea and vomiting associated with chemotherapy. However,
conditioned nausea and vomiting do still occur (particularly among those with an anxious disposition) and aversions to food or to other
elements of the cancer experience can also develop. Even after the end of treatment, patients' lives may be affected throughout the follow-up
period, as they attend appointments to determine whether the cancer has returned.
Changes in appearance and functioning are most likely to result in body image-related distress and to have a negative impact in the
immediate postoperative and treatment period (Cororve Gingeret et al., 2014; White, 2012).
Progress in cancer genetics has resulted in some patients having negative psychological reactions to discovering that they have a genetic
predisposition to cancer (Cull et al., 1999; Hopwood, 1997). Researchers have examined the way in which patients manage information
about possible genetic predisposition to cancer and uncertainty about this information; make decisions about treatment (e.g. prophylactic
mastectomy); and how, in some cases, beliefs about genetic risk of cancer can precipitate or mediate psychological problems. Although
people who have had cancer may feel relieved that their active treatment has ended, they may experience fear and anxiety about the
uncertainty associated with the future (Dunkel-Schetter et al., 1992). Fear of recurrence is thought to be almost universally present (O'Neill,
1975; Somerfield et al., 1999), though it is more likely to be experienced on a continuum (as with other fear and anxiety). There are also
undoubtedly some patients that have to address these issues more directly as a result of the initial pathological staging of their tumour and/
or by virtue of knowledge about increased genetic risk. Beliefs about the likelihood of cancer recurrence are thought to be very significantly
influenced by exposure to information within the popular press and media (Lee-Jones et al., 1997).
Some cancers and treatment regimes are associated with neuropsychological sequelae. Treatments can have an impact on sexual
functioning (e.g. hormonal therapies or surgically induced damage to pelvic autonomic nerves). Quality of relationship is an important
correlate of sexual functioning (Weijmar et al., 1990). Radiotherapy and chemotherapy can be associated with reduced sexual desire, related
particularly to the occurrence of physical side effects such as fatigue, constipation or weight changes that reduce the extent to which an

individual feels "sexual." Fatigue is one of the most common unrelieved symptoms in cancer patients and is a major factor affecting quality
of life, both during and following treatment. Fatigue associated with cancer is generally more severe and persistent than "everyday" fatigue,
and tends to persist even in the presence of adequate amounts of sleep and rest. For some cancer survivors, fatigue does not decline to
premorbid levels following treatment and can become chronic. In an attempt to standardise the definition and improve the recognition of
cancer-related fatigue (CRF), diagnostic criteria have been proposed. Studies that have used these criteria have reported prevalence estimates
of 17 and 21% (Cella et al., 2001; Sadler et al., 2001). Fatigue is often associated with psychological morbidity, sleep problems and reduced
activity levels.
Given the many psychological consequences of cancer and cancer treatment, it is not surprising that clinical psychologists are often
considered to be essential core members of the multidisciplinary team in cancer and palliative medicine teams. Although this chapter
will focus on the way in which clinical psychology can be applied to the assessment, formulation and intervention elements of clinic
work, clinical and other applied psychologists can also make a valuable contribution in teaching psychological care skills to colleagues (e.g.
communication skills training; Fallowfield et al., 2002).
There have been various attempts in the past to examine the influence of psychosocial factors on mortality and the potential benefits of
psychological intervention on survival. Spiegel's well-known study of group therapy for women with metastatic breast cancer reported a
significantly longer survival time (36.3 months for group members versus 18.9 months for no-treatment controls; Spiegel et al., 1989). This
led to a great deal of interest in the effect of group therapies on morbidity and mortality. Studies of the effect of group interventions on
these variables were inconsistent, with some showing improved survival time and immunologic response for cancer group members (Fawzy
et al., 1995), but others failing to demonstrate such a connection (Cunningham et al., 1998; Edelman et al., 1999; Goodwin et al., 2001;
Ilnyckyj et al., 1994; Schrock et al., 1999). The issues have been debated (Cunningham & Edmonds, 2002; Kissane et al., 2001; Sampson,
2002; Spiegel, 2001; Yalom, 1985). Patients may request psychological intervention when they wish to prolong their survival. There is no
place within ethical psychotherapy practice for offering interventions that aim to prolong survival by directly influencing disease specific


biological processes. This is not to say that psychotherapy might not have a positive impact on treatment adherence or mood. It has
also been suggested that psychotherapy may have an impact by influencing host defences or the amelioration of chemotherapy-induced
immunosuppression. Walker et al. (1999) showed that greater mood disturbance is associated with poorer response to chemotherapy.
Watson et al. (1999) demonstrated that high helpless/hopelessness scores on the Mental Adjustment to Cancer Scale are associated with
a moderately detrimental effect on survival. It is possible that psychotherapy targeted at helplessness and/or hopelessness might produce
modest survival benefits. Ultimately in psychological assessment, formulation and intervention, it will be the personal meaning and
response to diagnosis and circumstances that will be most important in planning psychological care.

Assessment
Assessing a person with cancer for psychological problems may require some changes from assessments carried out in general clinical
psychology practice settings with physically healthy people.

Starting the Assessment Process
Clinical psychologists who are not used to working with people with cancer may find initial exposure to working in this area difficult
and emotionally challenging, particularly if their involvement relates to the care of someone with an advanced and incurable cancer.
Psychologists may struggle with their own beliefs about mortality with concepts of "justice" and "fairness" in the world, particularly when
first starting work in this area. It is important to be able to discuss any related concerns and problems with an experienced supervisor and to
ensure adequate self-care opportunities.
The process of assessment can be therapeutic, particularly with patients who have not had an opportunity to talk about their cancer
experiences. The psychologist should aim to balance supportive-expressive and problem-focused content within the assessment and allow


for the validation of the emotional impact of cancer-related events. The pacing and content of assessment needs to be implemented with
this delicate balance in mind. Many patients will not have had the opportunity to tell their "cancer story" - that is, to talk about their cancer
experiences from the time when they first presented with symptoms to the present. Psychologists should not underestimate the therapeutic
value that can be gained from an assessment that has been sensitively conducted.
If all assessment contact occurs in the presence of a relative, then it is common for the patient to censor what they disclose for fear of
causing further distress to the relative whom they know is already distressed by what they have been experiencing. Assessments should
therefore always include time when the person with cancer is able to speak with a clinical psychologist on their own.
The Content of Assessment
There are some common areas that should be routinely addressed as part of a specialist psychological assessment of someone with cancer.
These are screening for the presence or absence of symptoms and listening for themes that have been outlined in the earlier section of
this chapter on epidemiology. Assessing for the presence or absence of psychological symptoms is similar to work in mainstream practice,
though it is important to be aware that there are some cancers and cancer treatments that result in psychological symptoms that would
otherwise be assumed to be mediated by non-disease related factors. It is important for subsequent case formulation and treatment
planning to understand if a symptom is related to cancer and its treatment or to premorbid factors.
For example, a patient who has a biochemically mediated anxiety reaction is unlikely to benefit from strategies designed to reduce
autonomic arousal or challenge thoughts relating to panic. Assessment content should always therefore include a component that asks
about cancer type, chemotherapy regime and a full list of medications that have been taken.
Brennan (2001) has outlined a very useful way of conceptualising the themes that are commonly reflected among the thoughts of people
with cancer. He proposes ways in which these might influence negative and positive patterns of adjustment to cancer, based on a social-
cognitive transition model. During the process of psychological assessment, information can be elicited about these cognitive themes. They


are highly likely to be important both in formulating the contributors to common patterns of adjustment and in planning intervention
strategies that might be subsequently implemented. Information may be elicited using specific questioning designed to facilitate reporting
of the issues within the model. There are of course times when patients will disclose information relating to these themes without the need
for prompting, allowing information to be collated according to themes at a later point.
Meaning is a concept that has relevance from a number of perspectives in understanding the psychology of cancer. Cancer challenges
people's views of the world as meaningful, purposeful and coherent. "What it all means" is a common focus of thinking. Higher levels of
negative mood tend to be linked with ongoing and unresolved searches for meaning (Kernan & Lepore, 2009). Lethborg et al. (2008) suggest
that a loss of meaning can in some cases be associated with and be a precursor to profound despair. Exploration of meaning will involve
consideration of the psychosocial domains of quality of life, as well as social support and relationships, self-image and sexual functioning,
psychological distress, fear of death, recurrence and personal growth, and coping - all areas identified as key to understanding adjustment
(Roland et al., 2013).
Cancer results in changes in anticipated life trajectory. For some people, this leads to a revision of priorities in life and the establishment
of new motivational structures. Other people find that this can become a factor that dominates their day-to-day thoughts and causes
hopelessness. A useful question may be, "Sometimes cancer leads to changes in the way people think about what they want from life and
how they will approach each day. Have you experienced this?" Coward (1997) has suggested that the experiences associated with cancer
result in "severe spiritual disequilibrium" and that the process of searching for meaning is a response to this state. Kernan and Lepore (2009)
suggest that it is possible to identify the specific pattern of search for meaning, classifying this as either continuous, exiguous, delayed or
resolved.
People living with cancer face the need to interact with health services, changing relationships, changes to "self" and coping (Bennion
& Molassiotis, 2013) - needs which are determined by and should be understood in relation to prior life experiences and history. Lepore
and Helgeson (1998) suggested that integrating the cancer experience into their pre-existing mental models should promote psychological

adjustment. O'Connor et al. (1990) defined the process of searching for meaning as posing questions about the personal significance of a life
circumstance, such as cancer, in order to give the experience purpose and to situate it in the context of a total life pattern.
While there are some patients who are able to retain feelings of self-control and worth throughout their cancer experiences, there is a
substantial minority for whom loss of control becomes a significant issue influencing adjustment (Osowiecki & Compas, 1998). Asking the
following may be helpful: "How much control have you felt that you have had in terms of your cancer experiences?"
Like many other physical illnesses, cancer has an impact on the nature of the significant emotional attachments that the person with
cancer has with others in their lives. The social and family support that is experienced by some patients can act as a significant personal
resource, and for others the lack of such support leads to feelings of isolation and loneliness. Lack of understanding of certain tumours (e.g.
cancer of the vulva) can contribute to feelings of isolation and wider sense of separation in relationships and social connections (Jefferies &
Clifford, 2011). Useful questions include: "Has cancer had an effect on your relationships with other people? How have your relationships
with other people affected how you have been feeling about cancer?" Some relatives of patients with cancer become more distressed than the
index patient, something that should be borne in mind when conducting an initial assessment.
Assessment of psychosocial aspects of problems related to cancer should aim to be sensitive to issues such as the site of the patient's
cancer, the person's previous life experiences (particularly family and personal experience of cancer), treatment regime, experiences
following diagnosis and unique hurdles associated with cancer. Having knowledge of the main tumour site should immediately lead to
thoughts about some of the potential issues that will have been concerning the patient.
Beginning an assessment with an invitation to outline personal experiences relating to the sequence of cancer-related events provides the
psychologist with a way of identifying clues to thoughts, feelings, coping strategies, family relationships, inner conflicts, critical incidents
and contextual information that can be used for planning further psychological assessment content. The sequence of events leading to the
confirmation of a cancer diagnosis will often be significant, particularly if there have been actual or perceived delays. It is important to ask
people if there are key phrases that they recall from outpatient consultations around the time of diagnosis, for example by asking "What


sticks in your mind most about your initial contact with the clinic?" The way in which the news about cancer was given to a patient will be
significant and should be assessed. This can become very significant in terms of beliefs about staff sensitivity and support (crucial when it
comes to later efforts to access support) and the fact that distress in the early weeks post-diagnosis is predictive of later levels of distress.
Patients should be asked about their relationships with doctors and nurses, for example, "How do you feel about the doctors and nurses
that have been involved with your cancer care?" Most patients want to be fully informed about their care and treatment (Jenkins et al.,
2001). Satisfaction with information provided is a very significant determinant of overall psychosocial adjustment, particularly during the
early stages of cancer care and treatment. Ensuring that patients are asked about their current level of understanding of their cancer and
treatment can reveal misconceptions and informational needs that then become a key factor in subsequent intervention.
Cancer can result in recall of a number of memories of physical illness within families, and thus the following questions may be helpful:
"Do you find that you get unwanted thoughts about cancer? Have you experienced more memories of times that you or your loved ones have
been ill?" (Brewin et al., 1998). Images often have their origins in life events such as a relative with cancer, witnessing another patient on a
ward with the same cancer, or re-experiencing actual events such as the recall of statements that have been made by medical or nursing staff.
The occurrence and frequency of intrusive memories and thoughts about cancer experiences should be assessed. It is crucial to take time to
explore any images, and in particular to consider any personally salient fears or concerns reflected within them.
It is important to assess beliefs about the causes of cancer and predicted consequences of the disease. The content of such beliefs will
depend on the exposure a person has had to cancer-related information, for example through the media or through experiences of friends
or family members who had cancer. Ask the person, "What was your experience of cancer before you were diagnosed?" and "Has this
influenced the way you think or feel in any way?" Therapists should ask what the patient thinks and feels about the reactions of relatives to
their cancer, especially to what degree they feel they have to manage this in addition to their own problems. Criticism by spouses has been
shown to moderate the relationship between intrusive thoughts and distress (Manne, 1999). This is one of the reasons why therapists should
determine the impact of cancer diagnosis on the behaviour of spouses.


There are some patients who survive by developing a global avoidance strategy. This can make assessment difficult (as assessment
involves reversal of avoidance). Avoidance is often a key maintaining factor for problems associated with anxiety and depression. It should
be distinguished from denial, as the concepts used in formulation and the strategies which are used to manage each are different. Avoidant
patients differ from those in denial, as they know that they have cancer and choose not to think about this. This can usually easily be
determined by asking patients "What is your understanding of what disease you have?" or in some cases the more direct "Do you think you
have cancer?"
A small proportion of cancer patients will have had the experience of anxiety and depressive symptoms prior to their diagnosis. With
patients who have a positive prior psychological history, assessment should aim to determine which cancer-related psychological problems
are related to premorbid problems and which have been specifically triggered or exacerbated by the experience of cancer ("Of all of these
problems we have been talking about, which do you see as being a result of the cancer?" "Are there any of these problems that have become
worse because of the cancer?"). Katz et al. (1995) noted that the integration of the experience of illness into the self-concept without loss of
self-esteem may protect those with serious medical illnesses, such as cancer, from clinical depression. Information should be obtained on a
patient's self-esteem as this can be vitally important in conceptualising psychological reactions to cancer. It can be done by asking screening
questions such as "How do you feel about yourself compared to other people?" or "Do you ever feel worthless?" Knowledge about the presence
of worthlessness is often very helpful in distinguishing more severe levels of depression from normal sadness. Reference to changes to self
have benefitted from work by Bertero and Chamberlain Wilmoth (2007), which examined the impact of cancer on the self among women
with breast cancer - noting that this related to awareness of mortality, living with an uncertain certainty, attachment validation and the
need for a redefinition of self.
Having someone who is physically ill within the family can have a significant impact on one or more members of the immediate and
extended family (Kissane et al., 1994). In most cases families act as a helpful resource to support and assist a family member with cancer
(Xiaolian et al., 2002). Indeed, families are often very involved with decision making about treatment and tend to provide emotional support

throughout the duration of a physical illness affecting a family member. All assessments should at the very least include an assessment of
the composition of the family using a family tree or genogram. The important elements of family assessment include the level of knowledge,
support and involvement that each member of a family has with the index patient who has cancer. There are usually some members of the
family who have more frequent contact with the person being assessed, who demonstrate greater empathy and understanding, who offer
more practical support and in whom the patient will find it easier to confide. Each family member will also have their own understanding of
the index patient's experience of cancer. While it may not always be possible to speak with each member of the family at the same time, it is
important to gather as much information as possible about different perspectives of family members. Clinicians should consider the impact
of cancer on each family member. Applebaum and Breitbart (2013) have described the burden experienced by unpaid carers of people with
cancer as "multidimensional." Assessment processes should evaluate the needs of unpaid carers. This information may be included in the
formulation.
The assessment process should take account of the age and developmental stages of the constituent family members (Veach & Nicholas,
1998). Family "myths" are also an important part of the assessment process. These are sometimes referred to as the "family world view"
or the "family paradigm." Family myths encapsulate the way in which families typically address challenges, conflict and problems. The
many family myths encountered in clinical practice may be classified into two broad categories those which advocate directly confronting
challenging situations and those that propose avoiding challenging situations as the best course of action. These family myths often
influence how patients cope with cancer. To assess family myths, patients and family members can be asked the following:
In general, families (as with individuals) tend to cope with conflict or problem situations in similar ways throughout life. This is usually by
directly confronting the situation in some way or by avoiding the situation. Which of these styles would have best characterised your family's
way of resolving problems when you were growing up? Can you give examples of the ways in which other people might describe how your
family reacted to significant events in your lives?


When screening suggests that there may be family issues influencing presentation, family members experiences of cancer need to be
assessed. A patient who has had the experience of both of their parents, siblings and a brother-in-law die as a result of cancer will have a
very different understanding of the impact of cancer than someone who has not had such an experience. It is of course also possible that
someone will have been exposed to illnesses other than cancer and that this experience within their family unit will have some bearing upon
understanding their and the family's psychological experience of cancer. Families may express their thoughts about the most appropriate
way in which to meet the needs of family members who have cancer, for example by saying, "We don't think that you should tell him that it
has spread to his liver." Clinical colleagues will often look to clinical psychologists for advice on how best to manage these situations.
Clinicians may not come into contact with all members of the family at one time, as might traditionally be the case in an outpatient family
therapy clinic. It might take some weeks to build up a picture of how a particular family has responded to illness. Psychologists should
determine the ways in which families have addressed problems in the past, as this may lead to the identification of successful strategies or
assist the therapist in recognising characteristic problems and/or responses to problems within the family system. Clinical staff who work
within inpatient settings are in the unique position of being able to meet many family members in the course of their involvement with
inpatient care. They often make observations that can be useful in conceptualising family responses to illness.
Sources of Information
Assessments should aim to incorporate a range of sources of information on the content areas that have been referred to. Questioning within
a consulting room or at the bedside can be complemented by review of medical and nursing notes, interviews with clinical colleagues,
observations, the completion of self-report questionnaires and diaries. As with clinical psychology practice in general, there are many more
self-report measures that have been developed for use with people who have cancer than there are pages in this chapter to outline all of them.
Clinical psychologists who intend to work regularly in this area should familiarise themselves with the range of measures that are available
(Jacobson & Donovan, 2012; Mitchell, 2010). Examples of useful instruments include the Cancer Coping Questionnaire (Moorey et al., 2003)

and the Cancer Worries Inventory (D'Errico et al., 1999). Some of the more commonly available measures for use with cancer patients will
be briefly described here, with some information on the circumstances in which they might be an appropriate component of an assessment.
The Mental Adjustment to Cancer Scale (MACS; Watson et al., 1988) is a 40-item scale which measures coping styles used by people with
cancer. Respondents are asked to rate the degree to which statements apply to them (using a scale which varies from "definitely does not
apply to me" to "definitely applies to me"). The MACS takes approximately 10 minutes to complete and provides scores on five subscales.
The subscales are fighting spirit, helpless/hopeless, anxious preoccupation, fatalistic and avoidance. A shorter version of this measure is
also available (Watson et al., 1994). Osborne et al. (1999) suggested that the MACS may be measuring six independent constructs - positive
orientation to illness, minimising the illness, fatalism, loss of control, angst and helplessness/hopelessness.
The Cancer Behaviour Inventory (Merluzzi & Martinez-Sanchez, 1997a, 1997b) assesses self-efficacy for coping with cancer. The brief
version has 12 items and the longer version has 36 items. Respondents are required to rate the degree to which they feel confident in their
ability to accomplish the behaviour being asked about.
The Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy and EORTC Quality of Life Questionnaires (Sprangers et al., 1998, 1999) are
commonly used to assess quality of life among people with cancer, and have the advantage of having good normative data and versions that
are specific to tumour types and to cancer specific issues.
White (2004) provides a review of some of the measures that have been used to assess meaning. The Life Attitude Profile-Revised (LAP-
R; Reker, 1994), which is a useful instrument for assessing meaning in life, has been hypothesised to have six subscales named as purpose,
coherence, choice/responsibleness, death acceptance, existential vacuum and goal-seeking. Reker (1994) has suggested that composite
scores can be computed for "personal meaning index" and "existential transcendence" scales. This measure has been used to examine global
meaning with regard to the presence of distress, quality of life and intrusive thoughts among breast cancer patients (Vickberg et al., 2000).
The introduction of this theme within assessments can provide a way of asking about spirituality and religion. In addition to providing


a useful way of identifying issues that can then form the basis for further assessment, self-report questionnaires can provide a means of
quantifying symptoms and evaluating the impact of psychological intervention.
The Sexual Self Schema Scale (Andersen et al., 1999; Cyranowski & Andersen, 2000) has been used in studies of sexual responsiveness in
gynaecological cancers and can be useful when sexual problems require assessment. It consists of a list of adjectives for which respondents
indicate the degree to which the term describes them (on a 7-point scale ranging from 0, "not at all descriptive," to 7, "very much descriptive
of me"). The items that comprise the Sexual Self Schema Scale are embedded within the larger list of adjectives. Andersen et al. (1997) and
Yurek et al. (2000) have found that the sexual self-schema of their samples of women cancer patients accounted for significant amounts of
variation in sexual responsiveness.
Using Diaries for Assessment
Using diaries and written records to collect information for review can help a patient recognise links between two or more variables. Both
structured and unstructured approaches to diary keeping may be used. With unstructured diary keeping, patients are invited on a daily basis
to write in an uncensored way about their experiences. With structured diary keeping, patients are invited to write about specific aspects of
their experience. For example, patients may be invited to regularly record their experiences of physical symptoms such as pain or nausea;
appraisals of these symptoms; and changes in mood. Both qualitative descriptions and quantitative ratings on 10-point scales may be
recorded in structured diaries. Patients may be invited to write in their diaries at fixed times each day (e.g. each evening), or when significant
events occur (e.g. after chemotherapy, or when their mood changes by a perceptible amount). Key variables to be recorded in structured
diaries may be identified in clinical interviews or through consultations with staff or family members who have frequent contact with the
patient and have observed changes in their symptoms, behaviour and well-being over time. The inclusion of an element of assessment that
involves writing in detail in an uncensored way about thoughts and feelings can also be therapeutic in itself and may help the patient clarify
concerns (Stanton et al., 2002). Schumacher et al. (2002) provide a good description of cancer pain diaries.


Formulation
Following assessment, information needs to be synthesised into an explanation of the psychological factors and processes that are thought
to account for the onset, maintenance and expression of presenting psychosocial problems. White (2015) has outlined the key process and
content features of formulation in clinical health psychology. Some of the many issues and factors that could be outlined within a case
formulation and that are more commonly encountered within psychosocial oncology practice will be outlined in this section. Some of the
processes to consider in developing a formulation include patients' uncertainty and waiting, disruptions to daily life, making sense of the
experience, finding a path through the illness and its treatment, sharing the burden of illness, dealing with the changes associated with self-
perception, and processing thought and feelings about what the future may hold (Holland et al., 2010; Lang et al., 2013).
Faulkener and Maguire (1994) have suggested that psychosocial adjustment to cancer is associated with six hurdles: managing
uncertainty about the future, searching for meaning, dealing with a loss of control, having a need for openness, having needs for emotional
support and having needs for medical support. They suggest that a failure to deal with these results in psychosocial problems. It can
be useful in constructing a formulation to think about the extent to which these hurdles have been successfully surmounted. Using
information from the assessment, a case formulation should offer an account of the psychological reasons why some hurdles are more of a
challenge than others.
When information has been elicited on the presence, frequency and severity of psychological problems, the role of biomedical factors
within the case conceptualisation may be clearer. In some circumstances, this will be clearly apparent to a clinical psychologist with
some knowledge about the common pharmacological and oncological contributors to psychological symptoms. Colleagues in oncology and
palliative medicine will usually have considered these issues prior to referral or request for advice. In cases of doubt it is useful to discuss the
potential biomedical mediators within the multidisciplinary team. The practice of clinical psychology in cancer care settings often results in

clinicians being involved on a shorter-term basis than might be the case within adult clinical psychology practice in mental health settings.
This can be because brief interventions are implemented to address specific problems that have not generalised to other life domains. This
may also be because the therapeutic focus is restricted to symptom change in cases where patients are transferred to other care settings
and continued psychological therapy is not possible. White (2001) has used the term "problem level formulation" as a way of illustrating
this level of work, as distinct from a "case level formulation." The following sections will outline some common themes often seen when
formulating problems at both levels within psychosocial oncology.
A patient's perception of the severity and course of their cancer has a crucial role in determining their psychological response to cancer. In
most cases, patient perceptions are accurate and reflect what they have been told by their oncologists. However, there are some patients who
have unrealistic perceptions, for example overly optimistic or inappropriately pessimistic views regarding their illness and its treatment.
This can lead to problems, particularly when it becomes clear that their perception of their cancer is at odds with information from
other sources. For example, overly optimistic patients who believe that their condition will have very circumscribed effects may develop
significant psychological difficulties when they develop problems with functional abilities due to spread of their cancer. Expectations tend
to influence emotional reactions in response to new events. When cancer recurs, patients who did not expect recurrence tend to be more
distressed than those who did expect it. When patient expectations and perceptions are included within a formulation, it is important
to outline the hypothesised contributors to these expectations and perception. For example, a long-standing avoidant coping style or the
presence of severe distress at the time of information provision may influence patients' perceptions and expectations.
Appraisals and their link to coping strategies should feature in formulation work. Individuals with cancer who appraise their illness as
a threat are likely to use more problem-focused coping strategies; those who appraise their cancer as a harm or loss are likely to use more
avoidant coping strategies; and those who appraise their cancer as a challenge are likely to use approach coping strategies (Franks & Roesch,
2006).


Information on the range of internal (e.g. physical symptoms, memory of prior illness) and external (e.g. hospital attendance, comment by
family member) triggering factors should be considered for each of the presenting problems within a formulation.
Patients with a greater perception of discrepancies between actual experiences and ideal aspects of their self-concept tend to be more
depressed (Heidrich et al., 1994).
The stage of an individual patient's "cancer journey" should be included in formulations of their cancer-related adjustment problems.
Patients (particularly the more vulnerable) are more at risk when the illness is diagnosed, during the early months of treatment, when all
treatment has ended or when a recurrence or spread of the cancer is discovered. Formulations made about psychological problems occurring
within the first few weeks of chemotherapy are likely to include reference to the presence of physical side effects, personal experiences of
coping with treatment demands and emotions relating to considering whether the treatment is working. The concept of problematic re-
entry to a premorbid lifestyle can be used to conceptualise obstacles for patients who have psychological problems after treatment has ended
(Arai et al., 1996; Cella & Tross, 1986).
All relevant aspects of the patient's current and past life experiences should be included in formulations where this adds explanatory
value to how their cancer-related adjustment problems have developed and are being maintained. These experiences need not be events that
have been experienced personally but can be experiences that have been observed. For example, it may be useful to include reference to how
cancer-related problems link with events such as prior abuse, observation of domestic violence, or current social isolation. Exposure to child
abuse and domestic violence may render individuals vulnerable to developing a range of adjustment difficulties in adulthood. The presence
or absence of adequate levels of social support often moderates the expression or severity of psychological problems.
Patients with high levels of trait anxiety may experience heightened sensitivity to somatic symptoms. Cameron et al. (1998) have
suggested that this phenomenon may be a result of trait anxiety fuelling perception of heightened risk for illness. This results in the
formation of unhelpful illness representations. This, in turn, impacts upon coping and related behaviours. Cancer patients with high levels
of trait anxiety are also likely to have higher levels of cancer worry and higher estimations of the likelihood of recurrence.

Dispositional optimism should be incorporated into case level formulations as this can significantly buffer the levels of distress
experienced by patients in response to cancer-related events (Epping-Jordan et al., 1999).
The predominant coping pattern preferred by the patient should be outlined. It may be that there is a restricted pattern of coping where
patients rely on one strategy for all problems, as opposed to varying the strategy depending upon the demands of the situation. Escape-
avoidance coping has been consistently shown to be associated with distress (Dunkel-Schetter et al., 1992; McCaul et al., 1999) whereas
emotionally expressive coping has been shown to have benefits (Stanton et al., 2000). Although the literature in this area tends to give the
impression that coping style is consistent across time and problems domains, this is not the case.
A helpless response to the diagnosis is predictive of later affective disorder (Parle et al., 1996). For patients with affective disorder,
cognitive, behavioural, environmental and physical elements of helplessness need to be outlined. Patients who believe that they have been
successful in resolving concerns are less likely to experience significant affective disorder. Conversely, having a low level of confidence in
one's ability to resolve concerns may be a primary maintaining factor in depression and helplessness. The psychological effects of cancer and
cancer treatments may also result in the patient becoming more avoidant in their thinking about illness, having greater illness concerns and
diminished capacity to work (Cella & Tross, 1986).
A formulation should try to explain the process by which a patient's experience of cancer has been integrated (or not) with pre-existing
mental models and outline how any intrusive thoughts or memories have been triggered and are being maintained. A cancer diagnosis
challenges a patient's core beliefs and assumptions about themselves and the world in which they live. Cella et al. (1990) have suggested
that more "rigid" assumptions are likely to shatter. Patients who report prior beliefs with marked conviction such as "I was sure that I
was a healthy person" or "I was always in control of the way I reacted to life events" often experience more distress from having their
assumptive world shattered. Lepore and Helgeson (1998) suggest that the integration of cancer into pre-existing mental models should
promote psychological adjustment and that intrusions are markers of incomplete information processing. Patients who experience the same
intrusive memory (e.g. of a relative's prior illness) for a few months are more likely to experience greater depressive symptoms. Patients

who engage in greater levels of avoidance of memories experience greater anxiety. The occurrence of intrusive memories is often related
to the reactivation of traumatic memories that have been incompletely processed. In such cases the problems lies with assimilation or
accommodation of cancer-related experiences to existing schemata about illness, cancer, self, their own mortality, the regulation of emotion
or other personally salient schemata.
When patients have had past psychological problems that resurface or are exacerbated by the cancer diagnosis, this should be made clear
in the formulation.
Some people report a number of "benefits" that they think about in relation to their cancer experiences (see Thornton, 2002, for a review).
This information should be incorporated into the formulation as a positive "buffer" of problem severity or frequency. Positive attitudinal
features, self-efficacy and active, problem-focused coping are adaptive and associated with better psychosocial outcomes (O'Brien & Moorey,
2010).
A psychodynamic perspective contributes to understanding the psychological impact of cancer by emphasising the potential challenge
to one's sense of self and the threat to the ego (Backman, 1989a). Early childhood experiences that define one's self can generate core
conflicts that may be triggered by cancer. It is important to think about events within a patient's early personal history that may resurface
during cancer treatment and/or have the potential to influence reactions to cancer experiences. Some patients, by virtue of being in the
patient role, might come to be especially distressed in dependent situations or vulnerable to conflict with authority figures. Issues relating
to separation, abandonment or mistrust can influence the psychological experiences of some patients. When defences such as denial,
regression, repression of affect or intellectualisation break down, patients become emotionally overwhelmed and unable to proactively cope
(Backman, 1989b). For patients who have had early experiences when they have been unable to trust parents or significant adults within
their lives, delays in diagnosis and problems with the provision of information about their disease and care may be particularly difficult.
There can be complex consequences when family members have differing thoughts about cancer and the most appropriate responses
to the psychological needs of the index patient. Misunderstandings that are the product of such differing views of physical illness can

contribute to distress or, in some cases, to major family conflict. Family members may also have different feelings about the way in which
the index patient responds to their illness. Most families will respond to the initial challenge of cancer within the family by gaining mastery
of the situation. Some families have difficulty modifying their initial response to the illness when the acute phase has passed (Kreutzer et
al., 2002). It is important to track responses within the family, with particular emphasis on the extent to which these responses seem to take
account of changes in illness course, treatment or prognosis.
Compared with community mental health teams, there tends to be a greater variability in the knowledge and skill level of clinical
colleagues on multidisciplinary oncology and palliative care teams. It may therefore be necessary for psychologists working on these teams
to be more explicit about psychological case formulations and the implications of these formulations for treatment.
Psychological Interventions
Having completed an assessment of the problems and processes that are relevant in understanding an individual patient's experience of
cancer and linked these in a formulation that accounts for the onset, maintenance and manifestation of presenting problems, clinical
psychologists can begin to plan an intervention. As with general practice there are a range of psychological models and constructs that can
be used to intervene. There is evidence to support the application of a range of interventions (Fawzy, 1999; Fawzy et al., 1995; Grassi & Riba,
2012; Holland et al., 2010). Many of these target similar psychological processes, though may do so using different strategies and in a way
that emphasises different processes of change. Interventions should acknowledge suffering, encourage a productive search for meaning,
strengthen connections with other people and ensure that optimal physical care is accessed in accordance with needs (Lethborg et al., 2008).
The following discussion of treatment will be divided into two parts. First, the range of processes that are commonly influenced by
psychological therapy in cancer care settings will be presented. Second, the main schools of psychological therapy will be outlined, with
guidance on how they might be used to address psychological problems in cancer care. In practice, most clinicians tailor their application


of psychotherapy with people with cancer to take account of the presenting problems and the treatment plan will include elements of
educational, supportive, expressive or existential interventions. In this respect, psychotherapy with cancer patients illustrates the way
in which differing therapeutic modalities can be tailored to the presenting problems and issues facing the person who is physically
ill. Barrowclough (1999), Burton and Watson (1998) and Moorey and Greer (2012) provide helpful overviews of how psychological
interventions can be applied in cancer settings.
The establishment of a psychotherapeutic relationship with someone who has a life-threatening or incurable disease can be
overwhelming for clinicians (Anderson & Barrett, 2001). Some clinical psychologists that I have supervised struggle to apply procedural
elements of psychotherapy with people who have cancer, reporting thoughts and feelings that they are concerned that this might seem
irrelevant or insensitive to the degree of life threat and/or the nature of the issues relating to impending death for patients with incurable
disease. Although clinical psychologists are used to talking about issues that result in heightened levels of affect, when someone is dying, it
may seem insensitive to introduce issues such as defence mechanisms, conflicts, automatic thoughts or interpersonal relationships. Some
report that they feel that simply "being with" a dying person is more rewarding and less dismissive of the patient's plight. While facilitating
emotional expression is important, therapists should not underestimate the value of pursuing a more "active" approach to therapy, and
should try not to let their own assumptions and issues about death and dying get in the way of more active parts of treatment. Experienced
psychologists tend to incorporate such countertransference reactions into their intervention plans and know that they can significantly
enhance the quality of life of someone with an incurable disease by balancing the supportive, expressive and problem-focused modes within
therapy. Chochinov (2001) has developed what he calls "dignity psychotherapy" to focus directly on the personal significance of death.
This provides a way in which psychologists can integrate another dimension to their work with people with progressive, incurable disease.
Houmann et al. (2014) have demonstrated positive benefits of dignity psychotherapy among people with advanced cancer.
Deshields and Nanna (2010) have outlined a model of care that can be used for individual and supervision-based consultation. It focuses
on reduction in distress and symptoms, building on people's individual strengths, enhancement of self-efficacy, expanding the patient's


repertoire of healthy coping strategies and addressing needs for information. There are also many online email, chat fora and interaction
online support resources available (Kash et al., 2005). Psychoeducational work, skills training and counselling have all been shown to have
small to medium effect sizes in studies examining caregiver burden, coping, self-efficacy and quality of life (Northouse et al., 2012).
Processes Targeted in Psychological Interventions
Tackling Avoidant Behaviour and Thinking
As with many presentations in adult clinical psychology practice, avoidance is often a significant maintaining factor for many cancer-
related psychological problems. It may involve avoidance of people, situations or appointments and frequently extends to the avoidance
of talking about cancer within sessions. Interventions should therefore target both the nature of the fears and thoughts about coping
ability. Many psychological interventions target these factors, although they differ in the extent to which they explicitly emphasise this.
Psychodynamically focused therapeutic sessions may reverse avoidance by focusing on emotionally charged material in transference and
countertransference and tackle avoidance by making interpretations relating to defence mechanisms. This enables patients to gain insight
into avoidance. Cognitive psychotherapy is more explicit about the role of avoidance and may involve behavioural experiments that show
patients how avoidance reinforces their symptoms and demonstrate the benefits of alternatives to avoidance.
Avoidance is usually mediated by beliefs about the predicted consequences of not avoiding, for example the idea, "If I talk about cancer
then I will be overwhelmed." Patients are often very reluctant to give up their avoidance behaviour and often need to be offered an
explanation of why avoidance should be addressed, such as "You seem to be reluctant to spend any time at the day hospice as you have been
thinking that everyone will start to speak to you about death." This may involve exploring advantages and disadvantages of the avoidant
coping strategy and testing out the effects of dropping avoidance for a period of time.


Therapist (T): This is certainly a common experience of many of my patients. They would rather avoid everything to do with cancer than
have the unpleasant feelings associated with facing up to whatever it is that they are avoiding.
Patient (P): My view is why feel bad if you can avoid it.
T: I would agree with you. Avoidance certainly makes you feel better at the time. Some people find that avoidance does not work in the long
run or that it gets more and more difficult to avoid unpleasant feelings.
P: It seems to work for me.
T: It may be that there is no downside to your avoidance, in which case this may have nothing to do with the agitation and unpleasant
thoughts you were telling me about. On the other hand, it may be that it is avoidance which is making things more difficult and we may need
to work on helping you to reverse it.
P: I can see that it might be a problem.
T: Do you find that there is any change in how often you have to push the thoughts out of your mind or how often you have to make an
effort to avoid reminders of cancer?
P: I am not sure.
T: Given the fact that your avoidance could be crucial in keeping your problems going, would you consider monitoring this for a week to
see when and how often you have to do this?
P: If you can show me how to do that and you think it might help me.
This patient returned to the next session having discovered that she was having to engage in significant effort to avoid reminders of
cancer. This discovery was used as starting point for discussing the advantages and disadvantages of avoidance and for trying out alternative
strategies to address her urge to avoid unpleasant reminders. Modification of beliefs about avoidance such as "If I get frightening memories
then I should block them from my mind" can be combined with behavioural experiments designed to evaluate the emotional, cognitive and

behavioural consequences of engagement with cancer stimuli. Patients may be advised to keep note of the advantages of reversing cognitive
and behavioural avoidance.
Reversal of cognitive avoidance is essential for patients who are experiencing problems related to intrusive memories, flashbacks and
nightmares. Patients often find it easier to consider this if intrusive phenomena are normalised. Therapists may need to help patients
address problematic metacognitions that influence cognitive and behavioural avoidance. Avoidance is often reinforced by the avoidance
behaviours displayed by cancer care staff who may themselves promote avoidance in their interactions with patients and have their own
problems that relate to exposure to distress.
Facilitating Control
Many psychological problems associated with cancer can be minimised if people can control the impact of the disease and treatment on
their lives. The very process of engagement within psychological therapy (irrespective of psychotherapeutic orientation) provides patients
with the experience that they may be able to exert some control over the problems that have resulted in their presentation for help.
Group psychotherapeutic approaches also enable participants to learn more about the ways in which others have developed control over
their problems. To this end, the use of weekly activity schedules can be implemented during assessment and linked with intervention.
Forward planning can be used to enable people to pre-empt problems associated with treatment by scheduling activities around treatment
days. There may be occasions when a patient has to be in isolation, for example, because of an immunocompromised state or because of
radioactivity (in the case of brachytherapy). The use of an activity schedule can be helpful and provide the patient with a structure to buffer
the negative emotions which exposure to these scenarios can cause. Patients can be encouraged to keep written records of their fatigue
and daily activity levels. These can be used to plan responses to fatigue and to schedule appropriate amounts of rest. The Multidimensional
Fatigue Inventory (Smets et al., 1995) can be used to monitor outcome. Patients may have difficulty accepting the need for rest and the
limitations that accompany a diagnosis. This can often be addressed by enabling them to set more achievable goals and changing the


thoughts which make activity more difficult at times of diminished energy. The following extract outlines how planning activities was
discussed with a patient with metastatic ovarian cancer who was struggling to cope with weakness during a course of chemotherapy:
Therapist (T): You feel that there is nothing you can do, that the chemotherapy takes control over your routine.
Patient (P): It seems to get in the way of anything I try to do.
T: Do you remember using the activity diary when we first met?
P: The thing on the grid?
T: Yes.
P: Yes.
T: I wondered if we could use it again, this time to try to work round the chemotherapy. You know when you have to come for it, and now
that you have been in twice we could probably work out when you were feeling at your worst and work around it.
P: I see. Keeping a note of what I do again.
T: The main thing will be to make a plan, keeping a note of what you do will be a good idea though as you can check out how the plan goes.
P: Right.
T: When do you get the chemotherapy again?
P: I come in on Friday morning.
T: What do you think then about beginning to make the plan from Saturday to Thursday? We can meet up again next Friday to see how
you got on.
P: Just the idea of doing something to try to break the monotony helps.
T: Good. Let's start with Saturday morning and what you usually like to do on a Saturday?
P: I usually try to get out to the supermarket for 8.30, for it opening, to miss the rush.
T: When was the last time that you did that?

P: A month ago.
T: How realistic is it, based on the past two chemo visits, that you will be able to do that on Saturday?
P: Mmm, I would like to be able to get it done, but I need to sleep.
T: That's what this planning will be about, being realistic about what you can achieve. This way you can feel that you have achieved
something. Before you were getting down because you did not achieve anything, mainly because your plan was not sensitive to the
temporary changes in your life.
P: I see.
T: Is there another shop that you could go to? Or could you go at another time? Or day?
The emphasis on understanding personal values in behavioural activation therapy (of which weekly activity schedules are a part) is
particularly helpful in cancer care settings. This is because values are usually reappraised as part of the process of adjusting to cancer.
Enhancing Social, Partner and Family Support
Feelings of social separation, lack of couple communication, alienation and lack of family involvement in clinical testing and assessment
processes can also contribute to the adjustment of cancer patients and family members, for example, male partners of women with cancer
(Sherman et al., 2010).
Given the pivotal role of social, partner and family support, the formulation for some patients will outline the central negative influence
of a lack of a social network or adequate social, partner or family support. Here the therapist's role is to facilitate changes within the
patient's environment, and in the case of more prolonged therapeutic contacts, psychologists themselves become part of a supportive
framework. Patients must first be helped to determine the main reasons why there is diminished social support. This could relate to
hopelessness, procrastination, a lack of opportunity to socialise, or anxiety. Diminished support may relate to individual family members
feeling threatened as a result of the cancer diagnosis and/or having developed psychological problems which require intervention in their


own right. Friends and relatives may avoid patients, resulting in less social support being available. When relatives are uncertain about how
best to help the patient, therapists can arrange to provide advice on practical strategies and on how to overcome some of the obstacles to
providing support. Significant others may need help to evaluate beliefs about the consequences of expressing negative emotion for example
with ideas, such as, "If I talk to her about her cancer, then I will make things worse." Psychological interventions which focus on the needs of
couples in cases of breast cancer often have a positive impact on quality of life, psychological distress, relationship functioning and physical
symptoms (Brandao et al., 2014).
The management of communication problems that have been triggered by the cancer is generally easier than scenarios in which
communication problems are a long-standing feature of the patient's life, and cancer is just another example of how it can become manifest.
Patients may have held beliefs about the support that they thought that they would have received from friends and family and become
depressed when this does not materialise. Support may be withdrawn prematurely or be provided when it is not needed. Patients who
make predictions about the unrewarding nature of social interaction can be encouraged to identify and evaluate these thoughts and, if
appropriate, evaluate them using a behavioural experiment. Some patients find that they have no idea what they will say to other people who
ask about their cancer and may need assistance both in evaluating their predictions about this and developing skills to confidently manage
these interactions. After spending time in session on skills training or role-playing things they can say to others, patients may go on to try
out these new skills while in hospital or at a day care facility.
Therapist (T): So you have very few contacts with other people at the moment?
Patient (P): I suppose so. That's why they want me to go to the day centre.
T: Has that always been the case that you don't tend to see too many people during the week?
P: No, I used to fill my week without a problem.
T: What sorts of things filled your week that you don't have happening now?

P: I had my visits to the church lunches on a Tuesday, my sister visited on a Wednesday, I did some voluntary work on a Friday and
Saturday was always my day for seeing the family.
T: When was the last time that your week had this normal pattern for you?
P: Let me see, must have been about 2 weeks before the surgery, Yes, that would be the last time I had a "normal" week for me.
T: What would you see as being the main things that have interfered with you being in touch with other people like you used to be?
P: I don't know.
T: Let's look at it another way. What would need to happen for you to have a week that was more like the ones that you used to have?
P: It would need for be 2 months' time. That's how long the doctor said it would be before I had fully recovered.
T: That's certainly one way of looking at it. Can you think of any disadvantages of relying on the passage of time alone?
P: I get very low with no one around.
T: That's what I was thinking too. Your depression does seem to relate to having few contacts at the moment. Is there any way that you
could have contact with the people from your normal week but not have to go out and about to see them all?
P: I couldn't ask them to all come and see me.
T: Could you ask some of, or even one of them, if they would like to come for a visit?
P: Yes, maybe they are waiting to be asked.
Handling Uncertainty
The uncertainty associated with a cancer diagnosis triggers powerful emotional responses. All psychological therapies focus upon enabling
patients to articulate and express these. They differ slightly in the ways in which they might address this process. Psychodynamic and
supportive-expressive psychological therapies help patients express and tolerate the powerful emotions linked with uncertainty. In some
circumstances, the main vehicle of therapeutic change is the support and nurturance that the psychologist provides in enabling patients


to "stay with" this powerful emotion, contrasted with the pervasive avoidance that is often reflected in the responses of family members,
friends, significant others and society. There is variability in the psychosocial correlates of uncertainty. Some patients interpret uncertainty
about the future as a positive reason to "live for the moment" and others tend to respond to uncertainty with hopelessness and fear. Some
patients can accept the uncertainty associated with the course of their disease. They interpret this as an inevitability which cannot be
avoided and are able to keep their thinking focused upon what is known to them, without becoming preoccupied with "what-ifs."
The way in which cancer services are delivered can exacerbate uncertainty-related problems. Through consultation with colleagues on
multidisciplinary teams, clinical psychologists can modify the way information about the waiting times for test results is given, the way
appointments are scheduled, and the way in which cancer-related information is provided so as to minimise the problems of patients
struggling with uncertainty. These consultations with colleagues on multidisciplinary teams may be viewed as "indirect" psychological
interventions. These and other environmental and situational strategies should be considered as first-line intervention strategies for
addressing uncertainty.
Cognitive intervention strategies for uncertainty begin by enabling patients to understand that it is not the uncertainty that is mediating
their distress, but their thoughts and beliefs about uncertainty that are causing difficulty. Life is always full of uncertainties, but most of the
time we choose to avoid thinking about this. The following extract illustrates how cognitive interventions can be used to enable patients to
build a new way of viewing the uncertainties associated with cancer:
Therapist (T): The last panic attack was in the clinic?
Patient (P): Yes.
T: That was the time that you were having thoughts that you were going to go mad and end up in a local psychiatric hospital?
P: I couldn't stand not knowing. The uncertainty was unbearable.
T: This is perhaps something else that we could work on by looking at your thoughts, your thoughts about uncertainty and your ability to
deal with it.


P: I need certainty.
T: What would you like to have certainty about?
P: That the cancer will not come back.
T: You want to be told for certain that the cancer will never return?
P: I know, I know I can't have that. That would solve the panic though.
T: What is it about knowing it wouldn't come back that would help you feel less panicky?
P: I would know that I could control things again.
T: What sort of things?
P: Well, I could still work, could still see my children and have some sort of life.
T: Is it that you think that this is not going to happen, being with your children and having some sort of life?
P: When I feel panicky, yes.
T: So, you think about the fact that you cannot be certain about the cancer coming back, this then leads you to feel panicky?
P: I just think, I can't deal with the uncertainty, it is going to drive me mad. It will all come back, I know it will.
T: So your awareness of the uncertainty leads you to think things will go out of control, that the cancer will come back. Feeling more in
control you think might help you to feel less panicked about it?
P: Yes.
T: Perhaps we could also put together an action plan of all of the things you could do if the cancer were to come back. This might mean that
you have less need to keep going over this possibility in your mind.
P: Not just yet, if I can feel more in control then I think I could just about face this.
T: I agree, let's spend our next session on that topic, helping you to feel more in control and able to deal with the uncertainties in life.


Specific Treatment Modalities
Cognitive-Behavioural and Problem-Solving Approaches
Cognitive behavioural interventions and therapies have been shown to be effective when applied to the psychosocial issues and problems
experienced by cancer patients (Fawzy et al., 1995; Meyer & Mark, 1995; Moorey & Greer, 2012). In general, the greatest benefits for cancer
patients and their family carers have been associated with integrative, structured, goal-oriented and time-limited approaches (Applebaum &
Breitbart, 2013; Grassi & Riba, 2012; Holland et al., 2010).
The guidance from Moorey and Greer (2012) on the application of cognitive behavioural psychotherapy with people who have cancer has
stood the test of time. Cognitive behaviourally based interventions such as adjuvant psychological therapy have been shown to alleviate
anxiety and depressive symptoms and be superior to supportive counselling (Greer et al., 1992; Greer & Moorey, 1997; Moorey & Greer, 2012;
Moorey et al., 1998). Problem-solving therapy has been shown to be effective in reducing cancer-related distress and improving quality of life
(Nezu et al., 2003). Some interventions, although not strictly cognitive behavioural therapy, incorporate cognitive and behavioural strategies
as part of a package of psychoeducation. There is good evidence of their application to depression (Barsevick et al., 2002) and pain (Devine,
2003) in cancer. Psychosocial interventions have also been shown to have positive impact on pain severity and interference, with medium
effect sizes being reported (Sheinfeld Gorin et al., 2012).
Most cognitive behavioural approaches to psychosocial morbidity in cancer are time- limited interventions that enable patients to acquire
strategies to regulate their feelings and behaviour in relation to cancer and its impact on their lives. They aim to enhance confidence with
ability to cope with the hurdles which cancer can present. They help patients to successfully manage the practical aspects of living with
cancer.

In some circumstances, it may be necessary to devote more therapy time to the coverage of existential themes, particularly when working
with those patients who have advanced disease. Kissane et al. (1997) outline details of this in an approach that they called cognitive-
existential therapy. Concentrating on emotional expression as a therapeutic component is an important part of cognitive behaviour therapy,
especially with regard to "realistic" thoughts and in the presence of avoidant coping. Cognitive behavioural therapies can also be delivered in
a group format for cancer patients (Bottomley, 1996). Supportive expressive psychotherapy has traditionally been delivered in this format
and will be considered next.
Supportive Expressive Psychotherapy
Supportive expressive treatment has been traditionally delivered in a group therapy format and in the context of evaluating the impact of
participation in such groups on survival. One of the major goals of this modality is to enable individuals to express a wide range of positive
and negative emotions. Based on the premise that most people tend to avoid the fear and anxiety associated with the possibility of death,
supportive expressive therapy enables someone to express and tolerate the affect associated with thoughts of death and dying. This has been
referred to as "detoxifying death" (Spiegel & Classen, 2000). It has been suggested that therapy with this focus may be more appropriate for
patients with advanced cancer. Therapy consists of building bonds between participants, facilitating emotional expression, assisting with
the redefinition of life priorities, enabling increased access to support of family and friends, improving doctor-patient relationships and
improving coping skills.
Interventions that Focus on Family Dynamics
Family therapy has traditionally been applied to the psychosocial needs of families with a physically ill child (Finney & Bonner, 1993; Wood,
1994), to the needs of families with children who have emotional and behavioural problems (Cottrell & Boston, 2002), and to the needs
of families with adults who have mental health problems (Barrett et al., 1996), though this has been changing over the past two decades

(Doherty et al., 1994; Speice et al., 2000). In psychosocial oncology, most family-oriented interventions seek to enhance communication and
facilitate relationships that are sensitive to the emotional and psychological dimensions of the family member with cancer. Treatment goals
often involve enabling patients to tackle avoidance of communication, particularly on emotionally charged topics such as death. Therapeutic
work may focus upon enabling families to ensure that cancer does not become a dominant feature in influencing all relationships and
responses to everyday events. Families often find it useful to focus on the identification of shared assets and to engage in a process whereby
they begin to prioritise the problems that face them or consider how they might have untapped resources that could be used to address
problems. The majority of families are able to maintain a degree of stability, ensuring that the non-medical needs of the family are addressed.
However, therapeutic time may need to be devoted to reinforcing the non-medical needs of the index patient (and possibly those of key
family members, especially those of young children). This is particularly the case when families have been neglecting the well-being of
individual family members or of the family as a whole.
Interventions with a Psychodynamic Focus
In psychodynamic therapies, a major goal is to enable the patient to experience and express distressing emotions within a non-judgemental,
supportive relationship. The therapist also helps the patient to explore underlying conflicts, and understand their expression within current
relationships. The aims when using a psychodynamic approach to psychological therapy with people who have cancer is to facilitate
movement from the use of rigid, limiting defences to proactive, positive coping efforts. As with all psychodynamically based interventions
in general adult practice, the therapeutic relationship with the person who has cancer is key to the process. Within the psychodynamic
framework, the clinical psychologist works towards enabling patients to have deep trust within the therapeutic relationship, to let defences
down and to open up and engage in emotional exploration.
Psychodynamic psychotherapy helps patients address unresolved childhood conflicts and understand the role that these conflicts play
in current relationships. In psychodynamic psychotherapy patients experience appropriate support and re-establish a sense of personal

control. They may transfer early childhood feelings and ways of relating that were established with parents onto the psychologist,
causing distortions and conflict within the therapeutic relationship. However, this transference is interpreted within psychodynamic
psychotherapy, so patients develop insight into how childhood relationship patterns are replicated in adult life. Cancer (like any physical
illness) can often foster dependency on the therapist. Patients can idealise their clinical psychologist as the "only one who understands."
Patients may become extremely angry when the nurturance they seek is not provided and will often resist the therapist's efforts to guide
or explore their psychological experience of cancer, particularly when there are unresolved authority issues. Some patients project the
anger that they have about the diagnosis and course of their cancer onto the therapist. The opportunity to work through these issues, to
accept mature relationship boundaries, to face dependency needs or work with, not against, an authority figure can provide significant
opportunities for emotional growth (Stoute et al., 1996). In psychodynamic psychotherapy the psychologist pays attention to patients'
deepest unexpressed feelings to help them understand and process those feelings. When patients do not need to expend emotional energy
defending against feelings, they are better able to cope with illness-related distress.
Psychologists may develop countertransference feelings when engaging cancer patients in psychodynamic or other forms of
psychotherapy. Countertransference feelings are emotional responses to patients rooted in the psychologist's own needs and conflicts.
Psychologists may feel out of control and helpless to impact the illness. They may be uncomfortable about signs of medical illness (e.g. scars
and disfigurement). They may fear loss and sadness if the patient dies. They may struggle with a need to nurture the patient and foster
an unhealthy dependency. Psychologists use their own defences to cope with these feelings, and these defences influence the therapeutic
relationship. In psychodynamic psychotherapy, psychologists acknowledge and understand their countertransference reactions, and use
these feelings to help cancer patients address their adjustment difficulties.

Summary
There are more than 200 types of cancer. Breast, lung, prostate and bowel cancers account for over half of all cancer diagnoses.
Approximately 910 people every day in the UK are diagnosed with cancer. About 25% of these experience clinically significant distress,
with depression and anxiety being the principal complaints. The main treatment modalities for cancer are surgery, chemotherapy,
immunotherapy, radiotherapy and hormone therapy. Many people are cured of cancer and it is now considered a long-term condition,
albeit one associated with considerable uncertainty. The effects of cancer, its treatment, the uncertainty associated with it, the impact of
diagnosis and treatment, the patients' premorbid psychosocial adjustment, their psychological characteristics, their appraisal of cancer,
their coping strategies, their social support network and their relationships with the medical treatment team all affect their psychosocial
adjustment and quality of life. These and other relevant factors are evaluated when cancer patients are referred for psychological assessment
and intervention. Psychological assessment usually involves clinical interviews with patients and members of their social and treatment
team networks; reviews of medical and nursing notes; and the completion of self-report questionnaires and diaries. Following assessment,
information is synthesised into an explanatory formulation of the psychological factors and processes that are thought to account for
the onset, maintenance and expression of presenting psychosocial problems. Distinctions are made between problem-level and case-level
formulations. Cognitive-behavioural, supportive-expressive, systemic and psychodynamic approaches have been developed to help cancer
patients address adjustment problems. They differ in their emphasis on key issues which must be addressed when working with cancer
patients. These are psychoeducation, tackling avoidant behaviour and thinking, facilitating control, enhancing social support and helping
patients deal with uncertainty.

Exercises
1.  You have been asked to assess a 42-year-old patient with colorectal cancer who is "struggling." You have been told that this patient is
significantly depressed and anxious and has frequently been saying to staff that "you would feel like this if your life was threatened.
Leave me alone."

Split into groups of three and assign the roles of clinical psychologist, patient and observer. In roles, begin the process of assessment with
this patient, paying particular attention to (a) how you explain the process of assessment, (b) the main content areas that you cover and
(c) how the assessment process and content might need to take account of this repeated statement that his distress reflects the reality of
his situation.
2.  You have completed an assessment of a 56-year-old woman with an incurable brain tumour who is on high doses of steroid medications.
She lives alone and is very preoccupied about how long she will have left to live and feeling "useless" as a person. She avoids thinking
or talking about her cancer diagnosis and is very irritable with ward staff. You are told that she appears most irritable when her elderly
parents visit. What further information might you wish to gather? What emerging hypotheses do you have that could be incorporated
within the case formulation?
3.  Consider some of the common emotional reactions to cancer (e.g. anxiety, panic, anger and sadness) and outline the ways in which some
of the main psychotherapeutic schools of thought might conceptualise these experiences. Discuss in small groups the psychological
processes that will be important in providing guidance on the management of each of these reactions.


Further reading for Practitioners
Antoni, M. (2003). Stress Management Intervention for Women with Breast Cancer. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Baum, A., & Andersen, B. (2001). Psychosocial Interventions for Cancer. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Grassi, L., & Riba, M. (2012). Clinical Psycho-Oncology: An International Perspective. Chichester: Wiley.
Holland, J. C., Breitbart, W. S., Jacobsen, P. B., Lederberg, M. S., & Loscalzo, M. J. (2010). Psycho-Oncology (Second Edition). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Moorey, S., & Greer, S. (2012). Oxford Guide to CBT for People with Cancer (Second Edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
White, C. (2001). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Chronic Medical Problems. Chichester: Wiley.
Assessment Instruments
Derogatis, L., & Lopez, M. (1986). Psychosocial Adjustment To Illness Scale (PAIS & PAIS-SR). Administration Scoring and Procedures
Manual. Baltimore, MD: Clinical Psychometric Research.
D'Errico, G. M., Galassi, J. P., Schanberg, R., & Ware, W. B. (1999). Development and validation of the cancer worries inventory: A measure
of illness-related cognitions. Journal of Psychosocial Oncology, 17, 119-137.
Johnson, M., Weinman, J., & Wright, S. (1995). Measures in Health Psychology: A User's Portfolio. Windsor: NFER Nelson.
Merluzzi, T., & Martinez-Sanchez, M. (1997). Assessment of self-efficacy and coping with cancer: Development and validation of the
Cancer Behaviour Inventory. Health Psychology, 16, 163-170.


Moorey, S., Frampton, M., & Greer, S. (2003). The cancer coping questionnaire: a self-rating scale for measuring the impact of adjuvant
psychological therapy on coping behaviour. Psycho-Oncology, 12(4), 331-344.
Smets, E.M.A., Garssen, B., Bonke, B., & de Haes, J.C.J.M. (1995). The multidimensional fatigue inventory (MFI) psychometric qualities of
an instrument to assess fatigue. Journal of Psychosomatic research, 39(5), 315-325.
Sprangers, M.A.G., Cull, A., Groenvold, K., Bjordal, K., Blazeby, J., & Aaronson, N. K. (1998). The European Organisation for Research and
Treatment of Cancer approach to developing questionnaire modules: an update and overview. Quality of Life Research, 7, 291-300.
Watson, M., Greet, S., Young, J., et al. (1988). Development of a questionnaire measure of adjustment to cancer: The MAC scale.
Psychological Medicine, 18, 203-209.
Watson, M., Law, M., dos Santos, M., Greer, S., Baruch, J., & Bliss, J. (1994). The Mini-MAC: Further Development of the Mental Adjustment
to Cancer Scale. Journal of Psychosocial Oncology, 12(3), 33-46.
Weinman, J., Petrie, K., Moss-Morris, R., & Horne, R. (1996). The illness Perception Questionnaire: A new method for assessing the
cognitive representation of illness. Psychology and Health, 11, 431-455.
Further reading for Clients
Antoni, M. (2003). Stress Management Intervention for Women with Breast Cancer. Participants Workbook. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.


References
Andersen, B. L., Cyranowski, J. M., & Espindle, D. (1999). Men's sexual self-schema. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 645-
661.
Andersen, B. L., Woods, X. A., & Copeland, L. J. (1997). Sexual self schema and sexual morbidity among gynaecologic cancer survivors.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65, 221-229.
Anderson, J. R., & Barrett, R. L. (Eds.). (2001). Ethics in HIV-related Psychotherapy: Clinical Decision Making in Complex Cases. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Applebaum, A. J., & Breitbart, W. (2013). Care for the cancer caregiver: A systematic review Palliative & Supportive Care, 11 (3), 231-252.
Arai, Y., Kawakita, M., Hida, S., Terachi, T., Okada, Y., & Yoshida, O. (1996). Psychological aspects in long term survivors of testicular
cancer. The Journal of Urology, 155, 574-578.
Backman, M. E. (1989a). Challenges to the self. In M. E. Backman (Ed.), The Psychology of the Physically Ill Patient: A Clinician's Guide (pp.
15-22). New York: Plenum Press.
Backman, M. E. (1989b). Psychosocial Issues and Medical Illness. In M. E. Backman (Ed.), The Psychology of the Physically Ill Patient: A
Clinician's Guide (pp. 7-14). New York: Plenum Press.
Barrett, P. M., Dadds, M., R., & Rapee, R. M. (1996). Family treatment of childhood anxiety: A controlled trial. Journal of Consulting &
Clinical Psychology, 64(2), 333-342.
Barrowclough, J. (1999). Cancer and Emotion. An Introduction to Psycho-Oncology. Chichester. Wiley.
Barsevick, A. M., Sweeney, C., Haney, E., & Chung, E. (2002). A systematic qualitative analysis of psychoeducational interventions for
depression in patients with cancer. Oncology Nursing Forum, 29, 73-87.


Bennion, A. E., & Molassiotis, A. (2013). Qualitative research into the symptom experiences of adult cancer patients after treatments: A
systematic review and meta-synthesis. Supportive Care in Cancer, 21(1), 9-25.
Bertero, C., & Chamberlain Wilmoth, M. (2007). Breast cancer diagnosis and its treatment affecting the self: a meta-synthesis. Cancer
Nursing. 30 (3), 194-202.
Bottomley, A. (1996). Group cognitive behavioural therapy: an intervention for cancer patients, International Journal of Palliative
Nursing, 2, 131-137.
Brandao, T., Schulz, M. S., & Matos, P. M. (2014). Psychological intervention with couples coping with breast cancer: A systematic review.
Psychology and Health, 29 (5), 491-516.
Brennan, J. (2001). Adjustment to Cancer-Coping or Personal Transition? Psycho-Oncology, 10, 1-18.
Brewin, C., Watson, M., McCarthy, S., Hyman, P., & Dayson, D. (1998). Memory processes and the course of anxiety and depression in
cancer patients, Psychological Medicine, 28, 219-224.
Burton, M., & Watson, M. (1998). Counselling People with Cancer. Chichester: Wiley.
Cameron, L. D., Leventhal, H., & Love, R. R. (1998). Trait anxiety, symptom perceptions, and illness-related responses among women
with breast cancer in remission during a tamoxifen clinical trial. Health Psychology, 17, 459-469.
Cancer Research UK. (2015). Cancer Statistics Key Stats-All Cancers Combined. London: Cancer Research UK.
Cella, D., Davis, K., Breitbart, W., & Curt, G. (2001). Cancer-related fatigue: Prevalence of proposed diagnostic criteria in a United States
sample of cancer survivors. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 19(14), 3385-3391.
Cella, D. F., Mahon, S. M., & Donovan, M. I. (1990). Cancer recurrence as a traumatic event. Behavioural Medicine, 16(1), 15-22.
Cella, D. F., & Tross, S. (1986). Psychological adjustment to survival from Hodgkin's Disease. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
54, 616-622.


Chochinov, H. M. (2001). Dignity-conserving care- a new model for palliative care: helping the patient feel valued. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 287(17), 2253-2260.
Coates, A., Abraham, S., Kaye, S. B., Sowerbutts, T., Frewin, C., Rox, R. M., & Tattersal, M.H.N. (1983). On the receiving end- patient
perception of the side effects of cancer chemotherapy. European Journal of Cancer and Clinical Oncology, 19, 203-208.
Cororve Gingeret, M., Teo, I., & Epner, D. E. (2014). Managing body image difficulties of adult cancer patients. Cancer, 120 (5), 633-641.
Cottrell, D., & Boston, P. (2002). Practitioner review: The effectiveness of systemic family therapy for children and adolescents. Journal of
Child Psychology & Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines, 43(5), 573-586.
Coward, D. D. (1997). Constructing meaning from the experience of cancer. Seminars in Oncology Nursing, 13, 248-251.
Cull, A., Anderson, E.D.C., Campbell, S., Mackay, J., Smyth, E., & Steel, M. (1999). The impact of genetic counselling about breast cancer
risk on women's risk perceptions and levels of distress. British Journal of Cancer, 79(3/4), 501-508.
Cunningham, A. J., & Edmonds, C. (2002). Group psychosocial support in metastatic breast cancer (letter). New England Journal of
Medicine, 346(16), 1247-1248.
Cunningham, A. J., Edmonds, C.V.I., Jenkins, G. P., Pollack, H., Lockwood, G. A., & Warr D (1998). A randomized controlled trial of the
effects of group psychological therapy on survival in women with metastatic breast cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 7, 508-517.
Cyranowski, J. M., & Andersen, B. L. (2000). Evidence of Self-Schematic Cognitive Processing in Women with Differing Sexual Self-Views.
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 19(4), 519-543.
Derogatis, L. R., Morrow, G. R., Fetting, J., Penman, D., Piasetsky, S., Schmale, A. M., ... Carnicke, C.L.M. (1983). The prevalence of
psychiatric disorders among cancer patients. Journal of the American Medical Association, 249, 751-757.
D'Errico, G. M., Galassi, J. P., Schanberg, R., & Ware, W. B. (1999). Development and validation of the cancer worries inventory: A measure
of illness-related cognitions. Journal of Psychosocial Oncology, 17, 119-137.


Deshields, T. L., & Nanna, S. K. (2010). Providing care for the "whole patient" in the cancer setting: The psycho-oncology consultation
model of patient care. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 17 (3), 249-257.
Devine, E. C. (2003). Meta-analysis of the effect of psychoeducational interventions of pain in adults with cancer. Oncology Nursing
Forum, 30, 75-89.
Doherty, W. J., McDaniel, S. H., & Hepworth, J. (1994). Medical family therapy: An emerging arena for family therapy. Journal of Family
Therapy, 16, 31-46.
Dunkel-Schetter, C., Feinstein, L. G., Taylor, S. E., & Falke, R. L. (1992). Patterns of coping with cancer. Health Psychology, 11(2), 79-87.
Edelman, S., Lemon, J., Bell, D. R., & Kidman, A. D. (1999). Effects of group CBT on the survival time of patients with metastatic breast
cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 8, 474-481.
Epping-Jordan, J. E., Compas, B. E., Osowiecki, D. M., Oppedisano, G., Gergardt, C., Primo, K., & Krag, D. N. (1999). Psychological
adjustment in breast cancer: processes of emotional distress. Health Psychology, 18(4), 315-326.
Fallowfield, L., Jenkins, V., Farewell, V., Saul, J., Duffy, A., & Eves, R. (2002). Efficacy of a Cancer Research UK communication skills
training model for oncologists: a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet, 359, 650-656.
Faulkener, A., & Maguire, P. (1994). Talking to Cancer Patients and their Families. Oxford: Oxford Medical Publications.
Fawzy, F. I. (1999). Psychosocial interventions for patients with cancer: What works and what doesn't. European Journal of Cancer, 35,
1559-1564.
Fawzy, F. I., Fawzy, N. W., Arndt, L. A., & Pasnau, R. O. (1995). Critical review of psychosocial interventions in cancer care. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 52(2), 100-113.
Fawzy, F. I., Kreutzer, J. S., Kolakowsky-Hayner, S. A., Demm, S. R., & Meade, M. A. (2002). A structured approach to family intervention
after brain injury. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 17(4), 349-367.


Finney, J. W., & Bonner, M. J. (1993). The influence of behavioural family intervention on the health of chronically ill children. Behaviour
Change, 9, 157-170.
Franks, H. M., & Roesch, S. C. (2006). Appraisals and coping in people living with cancer: a meta-analysis. Psychooncology, 15 (12), 1027-
1037.
Gilbar, O., & De-Nour, K. (1989). Adjustment to illness and dropout of chemotherapy. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 33, 1-5.
Goldzweig, G., Hubert, A., Walach, N., et al. (2009). Gender and psychological distress among middle- and older-aged colorectal cancer
patients and their spouses: An unexpected outcome. Critical Reviews in Oncology, 70 (1), 71-82.
Goodwin, P. J., Leszcz, M., Ennis, M., et al. (2001). The effect of group psychosocial support on survival in metastatic breast cancer. New
England Journal of Medicine, 345(24), 1719-1726.
Grassi, L., & Riba, M. (2012). Clinical Psycho-Oncology: An International Perspective. Chichester: Wiley.
Greer, S., & Moorey, S. (1997). Adjuvant psychological therapy for cancer patients, Palliative Medicine, 11, 240-244.
Greer, S., Moorey, S., Baruch, J. D., R., Watson, M., Robertson, B. M., Mason, A., ... Bliss, J. M. (1992), Adjuvant psychological therapy for
patients with cancer: a prospective randomised trial. British Medical Journal, 304, 675-680.
Houmann, L. J., Chochinov, H. M., Kristjanson, L. J., Petersen, M. A., & Groenvold, M. (2014). A prospective evaluation of Dignity Therapy
in advanced cancer patients admitted to palliative care. Palliative Medicine, 28(5), 448-458.
Heidrich, S. M., Forsthoff, C. A., & Ward, S. E. (1994). Psychological adjustment in adults with cancer: the self as mediator. Health
Psychology, 13(4), 346-353.
Holland, J. C., Breitbart, W. S., Jacobsen, P. B., Lederberg, M. S., & Loscalzo, M. J. (2010). Psycho-Oncology (Second Edition). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hopwood, P. (1997). Psychological issues in cancer genetics: Current research and future priorities. Patient education and counselling, 32,
19-31.


Ilnyckyj, A., Farber, J., Cheang, J., & Weinerman, B. H. (1994). A randomized controlled trial of psychotherapeutic intervention in cancer
patients. Annals of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, 27, 93-96.
Jacobson, P., & Donovan, K. (2012). Psychosocial assessment and screening in Psycho-oncology. In L. Grassi & M. Riba (Eds.), Clinical
Psycho-Oncology: An International Perspective (pp. 21-38). Chichester: Wiley.
Jefferies, H., & Clifford, C. (2011). Aloneness: the lived experience of women with cancer of the vulva. European Journal of Cancer Care, 20
(6), 738-746.
Jenkins, V., Fallowfield, L., & Saul, J. (2001). Information needs of patients with cancer: results from a large study in UK cancer centres.
British Journal of Cancer, 84, 48-51.
Jim, H. S., & Jacobsen, P. B. (2008). Posttraumatic stress and posttraumatic growth in cancer survivorship: A review. Cancer Journal, 14
(6), 414-419.
Kangas, M., Henry, J. L., & Bryant, R. A. (2002). Posttraumatic stress disorder following cancer. A conceptual and empirical review.
Clinical Psychology Review, 22, 499-524.
Kash, K. M., Mago, R., & Kunkel, E. J. (2005). Psychosocial oncology: supportive care for the cancer patient. Seminars in Oncology, 32 (2),
211-218.
Kasparian, N. A., McLoone, J. K., & Butow, P. N. (2009). Psychological responses and coping strategies among patients with malignant
melanoma: a systematic review of the literature. Archives of Dermatology, 145 (12), 1415-1427.
Katz, M. R., Rodin, G., & Devins, D. (1995). Self-esteem and cancer. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 40, 608-615.
Kernan, W. D., & Lepore, S. J. (2009). Searching for and making meaning after breast cancer: prevalence, patterns, and negative affect.
Social Science and Medicine, 68 (6), 1176-1182.
Kissane, D. W., Bloch, S., Clarke, D. M., & Smith, G. C. (2001). Australian RCT of Group Therapy for Breast Cancer. Paper presented at the
American Psychiatric Association Annual Meeting, New Orleans.


Kissane, D. W., Bloch, S., Miach, P., Smith, G. C., Seddon, A., & Keks, N. (1997). Cognitive-existential group therapy for patients with
primary breast cancer-techniques and themes. Psycho-oncology, 6, 25-33.
Kissane, D. W., Bloch, W. I., et al. (1994). Psychological morbidity in the families of patients with cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 3, 47-56.
Kreutzer, J. S., Kolakowsky-Hayner, S. A., Demm, S. R., & Meade, M. A. (2002). A structured approach to family intervention after brain
injury. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 17(4), 349-367.
Lang, H., France, E., Williams, B., et al. (2013). The psychological experience of living with head and neck cancer: A systematic review
and meta-synthesis. Psycho-Oncology, 22 (12), 2648-2663.
Lee-Jones, C., Humphris, G., Dixon, R., & Bebbington Hatcher, M. (1997). Fear of cancer recurrence-a literature review and proposed
cognitive formulation to explain exacerbation of recurrence fears. Psycho-Oncology, 6, 95-105.
Lepore, S. J., & Helgeson, V. S. (1998). Social constraints, intrusive thoughts and mental health after prostate cancer. Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology, 17, 89-106.
Lethborg, C., Aranda, S., & Kissane, D. (2008). Meaning in adjustment to cancer: A model of care. Palliative and Supportive Care, 6 (1), 61-
70.
Manne, S. L. (1999). Intrusive thoughts and psychological distress among cancer patients: The role of spouse avoidance and criticism.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 539-546.
McCaul, K. D., Sandgren, A. K., King, B., O'Donnell, S., Branstetter, A., & Foreman, G. (1999). Coping and Adjustment to breast cancer.
Psycho-Oncology, 8, 230-236.
Merluzzi, T. V., & Martinez-Sanchez, M.A.M. (1997a). Assessment of self efficacy and coping with cancer: development and validation of
the cancer behaviour inventory. Health Psychology, 16, 163-170.
Merluzzi, T. V., & Martinez-Sanchez, M.A.M. (1997b). Factor structure of the psychosocial adjustment to illness scale (self-report) for
persons with cancer. Psychological Assessment, 9, 269-276.


Meyer, T. J., & Mark, M. M. (1995). Effects of Psychosocial interventions with adult cancer patients: A meta-analysis of randomized
experiments. Health Psychology, 14(2), 101–108.
Mitchell, A. (2010). Screening procedures for psychosocial distress. In J. Holland., W., Breitbart, P. Jacobsen, M. Lederberg, & M. Loscalzo
(Eds.), Psycho-Oncology (Second Edition, pp. 389-396). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moorey, S., Frampton, M., & Greer, S. (2003). The cancer coping questionnaire: a self-rating scale for measuring the impact of adjuvant
psychological therapy on coping behaviour. Psycho-Oncology, 12(4), 331-344.
Moorey, S., & Greer, S. (2012). Oxford Guide to CBT for People with Cancer (Second Edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moorey, S., Greer, S., Bliss, J., & Law, M. (1998). A comparison of adjuvant psychological therapy and supportive counselling in patients
with cancer. Psycho-Oncology, 7, 218-228.
National Breast Cancer Centre and National Cancer Control Initiative. (2003). Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Psychosocial Care of
People with Cancer. Camperdown, NSW: Author.
Nezu, A. M., Nezu, C. M., Felgoise, S. H., McClure, K. S., & Houts, P. S. (2003). Project Genesis: assessing the efficacy of problem-solving
therapy for distressed adult cancer patients. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 71(6), 1036-1048.
Northouse, L., Williams, A.-L., Given, B., et al. (2012). Psychosocial care for family caregivers of patients with cancer. Journal of Clinical
Oncology, 30 (11), 1227-1234.
O'Brien, C. W., & Moorey, S. (2010). Outlook and adaptation in advanced cancer: A systematic review. Psycho-Oncology, 19 (12), 1239-
1249.
O'Connor, A. P., Wicker, C. A., & Germino, B. B. (1990). Understanding the cancer patient's search for meaning. Cancer Nursing, 13(3), 167-
175.
O'Neill, M. P. (1975). Psychological aspects of cancer recovery. Cancer, 36, 271–273.


Osborne, R. H., Elsworth, G. R., Kissane, D. W., Burke, S. A., & Hopper, J. L. (1999). The Mental Adjustment to Cancer (MAC) Scale:
replication and refinement in 632 breast cancer patients. Psychological Medicine, 29, 1335-1345.
Osowiecki, D., & Compas, B. E. (1998). Psychological adjustment to cancer: control beliefs and coping in adult cancer patients. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 22, 483-499.
Parle, M., Jones, M., & Maguire, P. (1996). Maladaptive coping and affective disorders among cancer patients. Psychological Medicine, 26,
735-744.
Reker, G. T. (1994). Logotheory and logotherapy: Challenges, opportunities, and some empirical findings. International Forum for
Logotherapy. 17(1), 47-55.
Roland, K. B., Rodriguez, J. L., Patterson, J. R., et al. (2013). A literature review of the social and psychological needs of ovarian cancer
survivors Psycho-Oncology, 22 (11), 2408-2418.
Sadler, I. J., Jacobsen, P. B., Booth-Jones, M., Belanger, H., Weitzner, M. A., & Field, K. K. (2001). Preliminary evaluation of a clinical
syndrome approach to assessing cancer-related fatigue. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management; 23(5), 406-416.
Sampson, W. (2002). Controversies in cancer and the mind: effects of psychosocial support. Seminars in Oncology, 29(6), 595-600.
Schrock, D., Palmer, R. F., & Taylor, B. (1999). Effects of a psychosocial intervention on survival among patients with stage 1 breast and
prostate cancer: A matched case-control study. Alternative Therapies and Health Medicine, 5, 49-55.
Schumacher, K. L., Koresawa, S., West, C., Dodd, M., TripathyS. M., TripathyP., Tripathy, D., Koo, P., & Miaskowski, C. (2002). The
usefulness of a daily pain management diary for outpatients with cancer-related pain. Oncology Nursing Forum, 29, 1304-1313.
Sheinfeld Gorin, S., Krebs, P., Badr, H., et al. (2012). Meta-analysis of psychosocial interventions to reduce pain in patients with cancer
Journal of Clinical Oncology, 30 (5), 539-547.
Sherman, K. A., Kasparian, N. A., & Mireskandari, S. (2010). Psychological adjustment among male partners in response to women's
breast/ovarian cancer risk: A theoretical review of the literature. Psycho-Oncology, 19 (1), 1-11.


Smets, E.M.A., Garssen, B., Bonke, B., & de Haes, J.C.J.M. (1995). The multidimensional fatigue inventory (MFI) psychometric qualities of
an instrument to assess fatigue. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 39(5), 315-325.
Smith, M. Y., Redd, W. H., Peyser, C., & Vogi, D. (1999). Post-traumatic stress disorder in cancer: a review. Psycho-Oncology, 8(6), 521-537.
Somerfield, M. R., Stefanek, M. E., Smith, T. J., & Padberg, J. J. (1999). A systems model for adaptation to somatic distress among cancer
survivors. Psycho-Oncology, 8(4), 334-343.
Speice, J., Harkness, J., Laneri, H., Frankel, R., Roter, D., Kornblith, A. B., ... Holland, J. C. (2000). Involving family members in cancer care:
focus group considerations of patients and oncological providers. Psycho-Oncology, 9, 101–112.
Spiegel, D. (2001). Mind matters: Group therapy and survival in breast cancer (editorial). New England Journal of Medicine, 345, 1767-
1768.
Spiegel, D., Bloom, J. R., Kraemer, H. C., & Gottheil, E. (1989). Effect of psychosocial treatment on survival of patients with metastatic
breast cancer. The Lancet, 14, 888-891.
Spiegel, D., & Classen, C. (2000). Group Therapy for Cancer Patients. New York: Basic Books.
Sprangers, M.A.G., Cull, A., Groenvold, K., Bjordal, K., Blazeby, J., & Aaronson, N. K. (1998). The European Organisation for Research and
Treatment of Cancer approach to developing questionnaire modules: an update and overview. Quality of Life Research, 7, 291-300.
Sprangers, M.A.G., te Velde, A., & Aaronson, N. K. (1999). The construction and testing of the EORTC colorectal cancer-specific Quality of
Life Questionnaire Module (QLQ-CR38). European Journal of Cancer, 35, 238-247.
Stanton, A. L., Cameron, C. L., Bishop, M., Collins, C. A. Kirk, S. B., Lisa, A., & Twillman, R. (2000). Emotionally expressive coping predicts
psychological and physical adjustment to breast cancer. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 875-882.
Stanton, A. L., Danoff-Burg, S., Sworowski, L. A., Collins, C. A., Branstetter, A. D., Rodriguez-Hanley, A., ... Austenfeld, J. L. (2002).
Randomized controlled trial of written emotional expression and benefit finding in breast cancer patients. Journal of Clinical Oncology,
20, 4160-4168.


Stoute, B., Shapiro, T., & Viederman, M. (1996). Developmental arrest and maternal loss in an adolescent girl with lupus erythematosus
and terminal renal failure. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153(1), 1476-1482.
Thornton, A. A. (2002). Perceiving benefits in the cancer experience. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings, 9, 153-165.
Veach, T. A., & Nicholas, D. R. (1998). Understanding families of adults with cancer: combining the clinical course of cancer and stages of
family development. Journal of Counseling and Development, 76, 144-156.
Vickberg, S.M.J., Bovbjerg, D. H., DuHamel, K. N., Currie, V., & Redd, W. H. (2000). Intrusive thoughts and psychological distress among
breast cancer survivors: Global meaning as a possible protective factor. Behavioural Medicine, 25, 152-160.
Walker, L. G., Walker, M. B., et al. (1999). Psychological, clinical and pathological effects of relaxation training and guided imagery during
primary chemotherapy. British Journal of Cancer, 80, 262-268.
Watson, M. (2000). What to do when a depressed or anxious cancer patient refuses further treatment. Drug Benefit Trends, 12, 5-9.
Watson, M., Greer, S., Young, J., Inayat, Q., Burgess, C., & Robertson, B. (1988). Development of a questionnaire measure of adjustment to
cancer: the MAC scale. Psychological Medicine, 18, 203-209.
Watson, M., Haviland, J. S., Greer, S., Davidson, J., & Bliss, J. M. (1999). Influence of psychological response on survival in breast cancer: A
population-based cohort study. Lancet, 354(9187), 1331-1336.
Watson, M., Law, M., dos Santos, M., Greer, S., Baruch, J., & Bliss, J. (1994). The Mini-MAC: Further Development of the Mental Adjustment
to Cancer Scale. Journal of Psychosocial Oncology, 12(3), 33-46.
Weijmar Schutz, W. C., van de Wiel, H. B., Bouma, J. et al. (1990). Psychosexual functioning after the treatment of cancer of the vulva. A
longitudinal study. Cancer, 66(2), 402-407.
White, C. A. (2001). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Chronic Medical Problems. A Guide to Assessment and Treatment in Practice.
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
White, C. A. (2004). Meaning and its measurement in psychosocial oncology. Psycho-Oncology, 13, 468-481.


White, C. A. (2012). Cancers. In T. F. Cash (Ed.), Encyclopaedia of Body Image and Human Appearance (Volume 1, pp. 307-313). San Diego:
Academic Press.
White, C. A. (2015). Physical Health Problems. In N. Tarrier & J. Johnston (Eds.), Case Formulation in Cognitive Behaviour Therapy: The
Treatment of Challenging and Complex Cases (Second Edition). Hove, UK: Routledge.
White, C. A., & Macleod, U. (2003). Cancer. In R. Mayou, M. Sharpe, & A. Carson (Eds.), ABC of Psychological Medicine (pp. 25-28). London:
BMJ Books.
Wood, B. L. (1994). One articulation of the structural family therapy model: A Biobehavioural family model of chronic illness in children.
Journal of Family Therapy, 16, 53-72.
Xiaolian, J., Chaiwan, S., Panuthai, S., Yiang, C., Lei, Y., & Jiping, Li (2002). Family support and self-care behaviour of Chinese chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease patients. Nursing & Health Sciences, 4(1-2).
Yalom, I. (1985). The Theory and Practice of Group Psychotherapy (Third Edition). New York, Basic Books.
Yurek, D., Farrar, W., & Andersen, B. L. (2000). Breast cancer surgery: Comparing surgical groups and determining individual differences
in post operative sexuality and body change stress. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 697-709.
Zabora, J., BrintzenhofeSzoc, K., Jacobsen, P., Curbow, B., Piantodosi, S., Hooker, C., ... Derogatis, L. (2001). A new psychosocial screening
instrument for use with cancer patients. Psychosomatics, 42, 241-246.


Chapter 22 Eating Disorders
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-22
In our Western industrial culture where food is plentiful, it is ironic that self-starvation and a pattern of bingeing and purging are major
problems, particularly for young women (APA, 2006; Agras, 2010; NICE, 2004). The eating disorders bulimia and anorexia nervosa will be
addressed in this chapter. These eating disorders typically have their onset in adolescence. In both conditions there is an overvaluation of
body shape and weight, with self-worth being judged almost exclusively in terms of these personal attributes. With anorexia, the primary
feature is the maintenance of a very low body weight, whereas with bulimia the main feature is a cycle of binge eating and self-induced
vomiting or other extreme weight control measures including dieting, excessive exercise, and laxative use. Eating disorders are of concern
because they are dangerous (Arcelus et al., 2011; Gowers, 2013; Klump et al., 2009; Mitchell & Crow, 2010). In chronic cases they lead to
many medical complications including growth retardation, osteoporosis, gastrointestinal bleeding, dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities
and cardiac arrest. The mortality rate among women with anorexia is 12 times that of the normal population – about double that in other
psychological disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or depression – and eating disorders are associated with a raised suicide risk.
In this chapter a case study illustrating the central clinical features of bulimia and an account of a client's progress through a psychological
treatment programme will be given. This will be followed by a succinct account of the clinical features, epidemiology, course and aetiology

of bulimia and anorexia. The use of motivational interviewing to engage clients with eating disorders in assessment and treatment will then
be outlined. An account will be given of the assessment of eating disorders along with detailed guidelines for the evidence-based treatment
of bulimia with cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy (IPT). Two biomedical interventions will also be mentioned:
inpatient weight restoration programmes for emaciated clients with anorexia and the use of antidepressants in the treatment of bulimia.
Case Example
Linda was a 27-year-old woman referred for psychological intervention by her GP because of binge eating, purging and low self-esteem. At
interview, she was appreciative of the chance to talk and eager to get help. Initially quite nervous, she responded well to invitations to tell her
story and gave a clear outline of her current problems and experiences growing up. She was tearful and frustrated when talking about her
problems with food. She also showed a wry sense of humour, pointing out the darkly funny side of her purging behaviour.
Linda admitted to feeling disgusted with her body, describing herself as fat and ugly. In childhood, she had been described as 'plump' and
'cute', but since adolescence had felt deeply unhappy about her weight and shape. For at least 10 years, she wanted to be three dress sizes
smaller or 25 pounds lighter. She avoided looking at herself in mirrors and tried to hide her body from the gaze of others. Everyday she
vowed anew to lose weight, berating herself for her 'failures' of the day before. She did not eat breakfast, drank several cups of black coffee
throughout the day at her tele-sales job, and ate salad or fruit at lunchtime. At the office where she worked, there were frequently biscuits
and chocolates available to staff. As the day wore on, Linda found herself increasingly preoccupied with not eating these so that it became
hard to concentrate on her work. Often in the late afternoon she would eat some of this food, which only seemed to increase both her guilt
and her urge to eat. Once at home, she cooked a low-fat, low-calorie, small-portioned dinner for herself, but was quickly hungry again. Her
boyfriend would eat a regular-sized meal and then either play computer games or go out with his friends. Alone, Linda watched television
and her cravings intensified. She became restless and unable to concentrate on anything other than her fantasies of forbidden foods and her

struggles not to eat. Usually late in the evening she would go to a nearby shop to buy 'forbidden' foods, including salty snacks, ice cream and
cake, and return home to eat them quickly, in an almost trance-like state. Immediately she would feel relief from tension and anxiety, but
soon after would feel remorse and guilt, leading her to either purge or use laxatives. She went to bed in a state of deep disappointment with
herself and renewed disgust at her body and lack of 'will power'. This pattern of restricted eating, bingeing, and purging was consistent with
a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa. Diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa are given in Table 22.1 and for anorexia nervosa are given in Table
22.2.
Table 22.1 Diagnostic Criteria for Bulimia Nervosa
DSM-5
ICD-10
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge
eating is characterized by both of the following:
1. Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-
hour period), an amount of food that is definitely larger
than what most individuals would eat in a similar
period of time under similar circumstances.
2. A sense of lack of control over eating during the
episode (e.g., a feeling that one cannot stop eating or
control what or how much one is eating).
For a definitive diagnosis all of the following are required:
A. There is a persistent preoccupation with eating and an
irresistible craving for food; the patient succumbs to episodes
of overeating in which large amounts of food are consumed in
short periods of time
B. The patient attempts to counteract the fattening effects of
food by one or more of the following: self-induced vomiting;
purgative abuse; alternating periods of starvation; use of drugs
such as appetite suppressants, thyroid preparations or diuretics.

B. Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviours in order
to prevent weight gain, such as self-induced vomiting;
misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other medications; fasting;
or excessive exercise.
C. The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory
behaviours both occur, on average, at least once a week for 3
months.
D. Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and
weight.
E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes
of anorexia nervosa. (For specifiers, see DSM-5 p. 345.)
When bulimia occurs in diabetic patients they may choose to
neglect their insulin treatment.
C. The psychopathology consists of a morbid dread of fatness and
the patient sets herself or himself a sharply defined weight
threshold, well below the premorbid weight that constitutes
the optimum or healthy weight in the opinion of the physician.
There is often but not always a history of an earlier episode
of anorexia nervosa, the interval between the two disorders
ranging from a few months to several years. This earlier episode
may have been fully expressed or may have assumed minor
cryptic form with a moderate loss of weight and/or a transient
phase of amenorrhea.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and adapted from ICD-10 (WHO, 1992, pp. 178-179).
Table 22.2 Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia Nervosa
DSM-5
ICD-10

A. Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements,
leading to a significantly low body weight in the context
of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health.
Significantly low weight is defined as a weight that is less
than minimally normal or, for children and adolescents,
less than that minimally expected.
B. Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or
persistent behaviour that interferes with weight gain, even
though at a significantly low weight.
C. Disturbance in the way in which one's body weight or shape
is experienced, undue influence of body weight or shape on
self-evaluation, or lack of recognition of the seriousness of
the current low body weight. (For specifiers, see DSM-5 р.
339.)
For a definitive diagnosis the following are required:
A. Body weight is maintained at least 15% below that expected
(either lost or never achieved) or a Quetelet's body mass index
of 17.5 or less (BMI = Weight(kg)/height(m²)). Prepubertal
patients may show failure to make the expected weight gain
during the period of growth.
B. The weight loss is self-induced by the avoidance of fattening
foods, self-induced vomiting, self-induced purging, excessive
exercise, use of appetite suppressants or diuretics.
C. There is a body image distortion in the form of a specific
psychopathology whereby a dread of fatness persists as an
intrusive, overvalued idea and the patient imposes a low weight
threshold on him or her self.
D. A widespread endocrine disorder involving the hypothalamic-
pituitary-gonadal axis is manifest in women as amenorrhea
and in men as a loss of sexual interest and potency. There may
also be elevated levels of growth hormone, raised cortisol levels,
changes in the peripheral metabolism of the thyroid hormone
and abnormalities of insulin secretion.

E. If the onset is prepubertal, the sequence of pubertal events
is delayed or arrested (growth ceases; in girls breasts do not
develop and there is a primary amenorrhea; in boys the genitals
remain juvenile). With recovery, puberty is often completed
normally but the menarche is late.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and adapted from ICD-10 (WHO, 1992, p. 177).
Linda was the second oldest of four children, with a sister a year and a half older than her. Her younger sister was born 11 months after
her, followed by her brother 4 years later. Her parents owned their own grocery business, working long hours to support the family. Linda
described her mother as 'probably overwhelmed' by the demands of her daughters, born so quickly after each other. To ease the pressure on
her mother, Linda and her younger sister spent a lot of time with her grandparents from the time her younger sister was born. She described
herself as very close to them, admitting they fussed over her and spoiled her with attention and food treats. She was deeply upset by their
deaths within months of each other when she was 12 years old. Linda and her sisters were sent to an expensive private school, where they
were less well off than the other students. Aware that affording the fees was quite a sacrifice for her parents, she worked hard and her grades
were average. She thought her parents sent her there to appease their conscience about how little time they had to spend with their children.
She regretted that they did not have more interest in how she was coping or achieving at school.
Linda had had two romantic relationships. The first was while she was at school. She thought she was so flattered that her boyfriend
wanted to date her that she probably was too accommodating towards him and regretted having a sexual relationship with him. After 5
months, she realised that he was seeing another girl at the same time, a fact which apparently many of her friends knew. In the last 2 years,

Linda met Pete, who worked as an accountancy technician and they lived together for about 9 months. Linda thought she probably was too
'motherly' towards Pete, cooking and cleaning for both of them, but she also felt guilty that she would not let him look at her body and
that she was only rarely interested in sex. She also thought she was 'too nice' at work, not standing up for herself and letting others take
advantage of her. Her two goals for treatment were to 'sort out' her problems with food and to improve her self-esteem.
This information was gathered from Linda over three assessment sessions. Between sessions she kept a food diary and mood rating form.
At her fourth and fifth sessions, an individualised formulation was developed with Linda, based on the cognitive behavioural model
presented in Figure 22.1. Linda identified strongly with the model and expressed high motivation for treatment. She was offered 15 sessions
of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) focused on bulimia. Low self-esteem and low mood were also discussed with Linda, both as responses
to eating and body image concerns and as related to her feelings about the loss of her grandparents and what she missed from her parents in
her growing-up years. Linda agreed to prioritise working on eating issues first. After her 15 sessions of CBT for bulimia, she would review
with the psychologist her mood, self-esteem and motivation for further work on self-esteem and low mood. Over the next four sessions,
Linda was presented again with the CBT model and encouraged to resume a regular eating pattern of three meals and two snacks a day, to
refrain from purging, and to complete self-monitoring forms (similar to that in Table 22.3) for eating. This was very challenging for Linda.
She felt ashamed to write down what she ate during a binge, fearing the psychologist would judge her as a 'pig' and 'stupid'. She was certain
that eating breakfasts and lunches would lead her to 'balloon' and gain weight rapidly. She described eating breakfast as a 'waste of calories'
and a bad start to the day. She felt bloated and 'big' after breakfast, with an intense urge to vomit. However, she responded well to
psychoeducation about how few calories are evacuated through using laxatives, chewing-and-spitting, and vomiting. She also worked on a
cost-benefit analysis of bulimic behaviours (similar to that listed in Table 22.4), which increased her motivation to try small steps towards
change. She agreed to try eating more often in the day. The associated reduction in her cravings was highly motivating for Linda. Another
step was to decrease the number of weighings from three times daily to once a week, which was accomplished in small steps. Linda also
realised that evenings were a time she usually binged, a time when she felt lonely and bored. She agreed with her boyfriend that they would

go out on a date together one night during the week. Linda also put her name down for a bowling league organised at work that ran another
evening in the week. For evenings when she was home on her own, she identified some distracting activities to do instead of watching TV,
such as phoning a friend, taking a relaxing bath or using the Internet to research her next holiday.
Overvaluation of shape and weight and their control
Strict dieting and weight-control behaviour
Bingeing
Low weight
BULIMIA
ANOREXIA
Stress
and
depressed
mood
Compensatory
vomiting
or
laxative use

Figure 22.1 Transdiagnostic CBT Formulation of Eating Disorders
Note: Adapted from Fairburn (2008).
Table 22.3 Self-Monitoring form for Bulimia
To understand your eating
habits, it is important for you to
keep a detailed daily record of
everything you eat and drink and
the related circumstances.
In the first column write down
the time of day, e.g. 9.15 a.m.
In the second column write down what you ate and drank., e.g. 3 slices of toast and marmalade and 3 cups of coffee with milk and 2
sugars.
In the third column write down where you ate them e.g. In the kitchen.
In the fourth column put an X if you think this was bingeing (eating too much).
In the fifth column put an X if you vomited after you ate the food.
In the sixth column put a D if you took a diuretic, put an L if you took a laxative, put an E if you did some exercise to burn off the food
you ate.
In the seventh column write down your comments on the situation and what you were thinking, e.g. 'I was upset because I thought
I looked fat in the mirror in my school uniform. I said this to my mum and she started to argue with me. I thought "I'm so fat. No one
understands me and no one likes me." Then I ate a lot to make me feel better. Then I made myself sick. I felt a bit of relief then.'

At the end of the form write down your weight on the one morning a week when you weighed yourself.
Complete this form every day and bring all the forms you complete to every meeting to review with your therapist.
Date
Time
Food and Drink
consumed
Place Binge Vomit
Diuretic Laxative
Exercise
The situation and
what you thought
Table 22.4 Costs and Benefits of Eating Disorders
Disorder Costs
Anorexia Hunger Tiredness Low mood Irritability Poor concentration Obsessionality
Rigidity Difficulty making decisions Loss of interest in leisure activities
Social withdrawal Low sex drive Sensitivity to cold Sleep disturbances Weak
bladder Constipation Periods stop and infertility occurs Excessive body hair
growth Swelling of ankles Thin bones Anaemia Stunted growth Dizziness
Heart problems Loss of brain mass
Bulimia
Benefits
Slim shape Low weight Approval from
others Sense of being in control Sense of
being special
Hunger Tiredness Low or irritable mood Dental problems – erosion of
tooth enamel Mouth ulcers Throat haemorrhages Chronic hoarseness
Swollen cheeks Acid reflux and chronic regurgitation of food Diarrhoea or
constipation Dry hair and bloodshot eyes Oedema Electrolyte imbalance
The prospect of a slim shape The prospect of
a low weight The prospect of approval from
others Sense of being in control

Irregular heartbeats (arrhythmia) leading to palpitations, chest pain and
fits
In the next 10 sessions, Linda continued to work on regularising her eating and reducing her dieting. She made weekly goals of adding small
amounts of 'forbidden' foods to her diet, as well as regularising her weekend pattern of eating. During this time, Linda experienced some
tension with her boss at work as well as with her mother over a planned trip home. She realised that interpersonal conflict was another
trigger for binges. This led to problem-solving work where Linda identified and practised alternative ways to cope with conflict, for example
increased assertiveness. She also learned additional ways to calm and soothe herself when such conflict arose, including progressive-muscle
relaxation (which is described in Table 3.5 in Chapter 3). Most importantly, Linda worked with the psychologist to identify unhelpful beliefs
she had about herself, including 'I'm greedy,' 'I'm not worth much,' and 'If people really knew me, they'd laugh at me.' She reviewed the
evidence for and against these beliefs, and conducted some experiments to test them out. For example, she predicted that if she gave her view
at work, others would be dismissive or ridicule her. She agreed to try giving her view at a meeting with her boss and was surprised by his
positive response to her suggestion. Through this work Linda identified a related belief that her needs were too much for others to cope with.
This belief was harder to work on, but Linda made small steps in making requests of people that she trusted, including the psychologist, by
asking to change the appointment time to a time that suited her better.
The last four sessions involved summarising and consolidating what Linda learned and making a plan for relapse prevention. She
identified her triggers and ways of coping with cravings and difficult feelings. She worked to reframe her thinking about 'slips' and to
identify ways to both monitor and reinforce her own progress. Linda attended a follow-up session 6 weeks later, at which she reported
overall good maintenance of gains. She no longer met the diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa in Table 22.1. She decided that she did not
want to do more work on self-esteem or mood at that time.


Clinical Features
Anorexia nervosa was first described in modern medical literature by Charles Lasègue in France in 1873 and by Sir William Gull in the UK
in 1874, and it was Gull who first used the term 'anorexia nervosa'. Both Lasègue and Gull described anorexia as a condition characterised
by emaciation, an inadequate and unhealthy pattern of eating, and an excessive concern with the control of body weight and shape. In 1979
Gerard Russell in the UK proposed that bulimia nervosa is a separate condition from anorexia. In the classification of eating disorders in
both DSM-5 (APA, 2013) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1992), this distinction between anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa is a central organising
principle, with the former being characterised primarily by weight loss and the latter by a cyclical pattern of bingeing and purging.
Diagnostic criteria for these conditions are given in Tables 22.1 and 22.2. The distinction made between anorexia and bulimia, while
descriptively useful, does not take full account of variations in eating problems seen in clinical practice. Many anorexic clients present with
bulimic symptoms and many bulimic clients develop anorexia. For this reason, in DSM a distinction is made between the restricting type and
the binge-purge type of anorexia. A number of other eating disorders are listed in DSM-5. Of these, binge-eating disorder deserves particular
mention. With binge-eating disorder there are uncontrollable episodes of overeating leading to obesity which cause considerable distress.
The condition is sometimes likened to bulimia without vomiting or laxative use. Eating disorders are characterised by distinctive clinical
features in the domains of behaviour, perception, cognition, emotion, social adjustment and physical health (APA, 2006, 2013; Agras, 2010;
NICE, 2004; WHO, 1992).
Behaviour
At a behavioural level, restrictive eating is typical of anorexia. Clients report low calorific intake and eating low-calorie foods over a
significant time period. They may cook for the family but not eat meals they prepare. Clients with anorexia present as thin or emaciated.

They may wear baggy clothes to conceal the extent of their weight loss. In contrast, clients with bulimia are typically of normal weight.
A cycle of restrictive eating, bingeing and compensatory behaviours is typical of bulimia. These compensatory behaviours may include
vomiting, using diuretics and laxatives, or excessive exercising. Usually particular types of situations that are interpreted as threatening or
stressful lead to a negative mood state, and it is these that precipitate a bout of bingeing. Such situations include interpersonal conflicts,
isolation and small violations of a strict diet such as eating a square of chocolate. Bingeing may also arise from alcohol intoxication. While
bingeing brings immediate relief, it also leads to physical discomfort and to guilt for not adhering to a strict diet. Purging relieves both guilt
and physical discomfort but may also induce shame and fear of negative consequences of the binge-purge cycle. Relatives who live with
bulimic clients may describe aspects of their behaviour that aim to conceal their vomiting and excessive exercise as secretive. In addition to
abnormal eating patterns, clients with eating disorders, especially bulimia, may display a variety of self-destructive behaviours including
non-suicidal self-harm, suicide attempts and drug misuse. These self-destructive behaviours are often construed as self-punishments for
not living up to perfectionistic standards or attempts to escape from conflicts associated with self-worth and individuation.
Perception
With respect to perception, in most clinical cases of eating disorder there is a distortion of body image. The client perceives the body or parts
of the body such as the stomach, buttocks, thighs and so forth to be larger then they are. Individuals with eating disorders may also have
low interoception - that is, difficulty interpreting internal gastrointestinal and emotional stimuli. This makes it difficult to know when it's
appropriate for them to start and stop eating and how to interpret their feelings and emotions.
Cognition
With respect to cognition, there is a preoccupation with food that is a consequence of dietary restraint. Low self-esteem and low self-efficacy
are also common. Thus, many clients with eating disorders view themselves as worthless and powerless, and see achieving a slim body shape

and low body weight through dietary restraint as the route to an increased sense of control over their lives and increased self-worth. This
process is often compounded by perfectionist tendencies and a wish to attain exceptionally high standards. In bulimia, the repeated failure
to sustain low-calorie intake leads to further self-criticism and low self-esteem and also strengths the belief in lack of control. In anorexia,
starvation directly affects cognitive processes. There is an increasing rigidity and inflexibility in thinking style and a gradual reduction in the
capacity to concentrate. In all eating disorders, there may be conflict concerning dependence and maturity. On the one hand there may be a
fear of maturity and independence. On the other there may be a wish to escape from parental control and the lack of autonomy and privacy
that this entails.
Emotion
Clients with eating disorders report an intense fear of fatness and depressed or irritable mood arising from dietary restraint. In bulimia,
low mood may arise from binge eating and the sense of failure that this entails. In anorexia, low mood may arise from a failure to live up to
perfectionist standards. Such episodes of low mood lead to bingeing, which brings temporary relief. However, after binges, low mood may
occur as a result of the sense of failure that this entails. Suicide attempts occur in up to 20% of patients with anorexia and 25% of those with
bulimia (Franko & Keel, 2006). Suicidality in eating disorders is associated with depression, substance misuse, and a history of child physical
and sexual abuse.
Social Adjustment
Withdrawal from peer relationships, deterioration in family relationships, and poor educational or vocational performance may all occur as
a result of eating problems.


Physical Health
The health complications of anorexia involve an endocrine disorder affecting the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. This leads to
amenorrhea; starvation symptomatology such as reduced metabolic rate, bradycardia, hypotension, hypothermia, and anaemia; lanugo
hair on the back; delayed gastric emptying; electrolyte abnormalities; renal dysfunction; and zinc deficiency. In bulimia, erosion of dental
enamel may occur due to vomiting. Lesions on the back of the dominant hand may develop if the hand is used to initiate vomiting. With
both anorexia and bulimia a particularly serious concern is that the client may develop electrolyte abnormalities that may lead to a fatal
arrhythmia.
Epidemiology, Course and Outcome
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are most common among female adolescents and young women, although some young men also
suffer from eating disorders (Hoek, 2006; Keel, 2010; Raevuori et al., 2014). About 1-2% of the adolescent and young adult female
population suffer from eating disorders. Anorexia is less common than bulimia.
The average prevalence rates for anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa among young females are about 0.3-0.5% and 1-4%, respectively.
The lifetime prevalence rate of anorexia nervosa is 0.16-0.3% and of bulimia nervosa 0.1-0.5%. Eating disorders are relatively rare in men.
The male to female ratio of lifetime prevalence rates is 1:3-1:12 for anorexia and 1:3-1:18 for bulimia (Raevuori et al., 2014).
The onset for anorexia usually occurs in adolescence, and the peak age of onset for bulimia is in later adolescence or young adulthood.
Since 1960 there has been an increase in the incidence of eating disorders in the UK and the US, largely accounted for by increases in rates of
bulimia rather than anorexia. Since the 1990s rates of bulimia have begun to decline in the UK (Currin et al., 2005). While eating disorders
may be more common in Western industrialised countries, there is growing evidence of eating disorders in non-Western cultures. In clinical


rather than community populations, comorbid mood disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorders are common in cases of anorexia, and
for bulimia comorbid drug misuse and borderline personality disorder are relatively common.
The outcome for eating disorders is poor for a significant minority of cases (APA, 2006; Arcelus et al., 2011; NICE, 2004; Steinhausen,
2002, 2011; Stice, 2002), but this can be improved with early intervention and evidence-based treatment. Arcelus et al. (2011) found that
the standardised mortality ratios were 5.86 for anorexia and 1.93 for bulimia, per 1,000 person-years. For anorexia nervosa about half of all
cases have a good outcome, a third have moderate outcome and a fifth have a poor outcome. Among those who die prematurely, starvation
and suicide are the principal causes of death. A fifth of such deaths are due to suicide. For anorexia a poor prognosis is associated with
lower weight, a more chronic condition, the absence of a clear precipitating stressful life event, bulimic symptoms, comorbid obsessive-
compulsive disorder, problematic family relationships, dropping out of treatment and lower social class. For bulimia nervosa about half of
all cases have a good outcome, a quarter have a moderate outcome and the remaining quarter have a poor outcome. A poor prognosis in
bulimia is associated with later onset, a more chronic condition, more frequent bingeing and vomiting, greater body dissatisfaction, higher
perfectionism, comorbid substance abuse, impulsive personality disorders and lower social class. Risk factors identified in an extensive
review of longitudinal and cross-sectional studies for eating disorders are given in Table 22.5 (Jacobi et al., 2004, Jacobi & Fittig, 2010).
Table 22.5 Risk Factors for Eating Disorders
Risk factors common to anorexia and bulimia
nervosa
Risk factors unique to
anorexia nervosa
Risk factors unique to bulimia nervosa

• Female
• Adolescent
• Genetic factors
• Pregnancy complications
• Child sexual abuse
• Physical neglect in childhood
• Gastrointestinal problems, picky eating and
eating conflicts in childhood
• Childhood anxiety disorder
• Stressful life events in childhood and
adolescence
• Weight concerns and dieting in adolescence
• Low social support in adolescence
• Low self-esteem
• Ineffectiveness
• Low interoception (difficulty interpreting
internal gastrointestinal and emotional stimuli)
• Avoidant coping
• Preterm birth or birth
trauma
• Infant feeding and sleep
problems
• High concern parenting in
early childhood
• Obsessionality (OCD,
OCPD) in adolescence
• Perfectionism in
adolescence
• Neuroticism
• Weight subculture (dancer,
model, athlete)
• Acculturation
• Childhood obesity
• Social phobia in adolescence
• Parental criticism about weight,
high expectations and low contact in
adolescence
• Parental obesity in adolescence
• Parental depression, drug and alcohol
problems in adolescence

Note: Based on Jacobi et al. (2004) and Jacobi & Fittig (2010).
Aetiological Factors
Under normal circumstances, when people are hungry, they eat until they have the experience of 'being full', and most of the time their
weight is remarkably stable, as if homostatically governed. When people try to slim through restrained eating, they experience hunger
and negative affect, and become preoccupied with food. In response to these negative experiences, most people give up dieting and
return to their usual eating habits and normal body weight. People who develop anorexia, however, redouble their efforts to maintain
a pattern of restrained eating when they experience hunger, negative affect and intense food preoccupation. In contrast, people who
develop bulimia engage in bingeing and later in compensatory purging. A variety of aetiological factors contribute to the development and
maintenance of these eating disorders. These include genetic, temperamental, sociocultural, personality, biomedical, cognitive-behavioural
and interpersonal factors, all of which will be addressed in turn.
Genetic Factors
Evidence from twin and family studies show unequivocally that genetic predisposing factors contribute moderately to the aetiology of
eating disorders and that they are 50-83% heritable (Klump et al., 2009; Racine et al., 2011; Wade, 2010). Positive findings from candidate
gene studies focusing on serotonin, dopamine and other neurotransmitter systems and on genes involved in body weight regulation have
not been substantiated in meta-analyses (Scherag et al., 2010). There is some evidence that appetite and satiety dysregulation renders people
vulnerable to the development of eating disorders and that this vulnerability may be polygenetically determined (Kaye & Oberndorfer, 2010)

Temperamental Factors
Collier and Treasure (2004) propose, on the basis of available evidence, that genetic factors contribute to temperamental dispositions that
underpin the development of personality traits associated with eating disorders. These may be conceptualised as falling along a continuum
from restrictive-anorexia-like disorders to disinhibited-bulimic-like disorders. The predisposing personality traits of perfectionism, harm
avoidance and depression may be the personality traits which place people at risk for developing both restrictive-anorexic-like and
disinhibited-bulimic-like eating disorders. Compulsivity and inflexibility may be the personality traits that place people at specific risk for
developing restrictive-anorexia-like disorders. Impulsivity and novelty-seeking may be the personality traits that place people at specific
risk for developing disinhibited-bulimic-like eating disorders. The assumption in this proposal is that the biological basis for each of these
personality traits is polygenetically determined, and that through interaction with the environment the traits develop and predispose the
person to developing an eating disorder. Thus, central to this hypothesis is the assumption that environmental factors play a key role in the
aetiology of eating disorders.
Sociocultural Factors
Evidence supporting the role of sociocultural factors in the aetiology of eating disorders allows the following conclusions to be drawn
(Levine & Murnen, 2009; Levine & Smolak, 2010). Epidemiological studies consistently show that eating disorders exist internationally
but are more prevalent in Western societies where food is plentiful, thinness is valued and dieting is promoted. Eating disorders are
more prevalent among groups under greater social pressure to achieve the slim aesthetic ideal, such as dancers, models and athletes.
Westernisation, modernisation, and exposure to transnational mass media advocating the thin ideal are risk factors for eating disorders. The
prevalence of eating disorders is higher in ethnic groups that move from a culture that does not idealise the thin female form to cultures
that do. While these findings point to the importance of sociocultural factors in predisposing individuals to developing eating problems,

not all dieters develop anorexia or bulimia. Precipitating factors such as stressful life events, lifecycle transitions, and the presence of other
individual genetic, neurobiological, psychological or family factors probably contribute to the development of eating disorders (Mazzeo &
Bulik, 2009).
Life Stresses and Personality Factors
There is some evidence that life stress, the absence of social support, negative affectivity, the internalisation of a thin-ideal body image and
possibly other variables cumulatively predispose people to developing eating disorders (Jacobi & Fittig, 2010; Serpell & Troup, 2003; Stice,
2002). Serpell and Troup (2003) propose that four background predisposing personality factors render people vulnerable to developing
eating disorders: (1) childhood helplessness; (2) childhood adversity; (3) low self-esteem; and (4) rigid perfectionism. In response to
sociocultural pressures for thinness, these four factors give rise to four intermediate predisposing factors: (1) dietary restraint; (2) low shape-
and weight-based self-esteem; (3) disgust of food and food-related body stimuli; and (4) bodily shame. When stressful life events that involve
managing complex interpersonal situations and relationships arise in people who have these vulnerability factors, an eating disorder may
occur. These include problematic parent-child relationships, body weight teasing, peer group experiences and life events (Klump et al.,
2002).
Biomedical Factors
Evidence from studies of people with eating disorders and participants in starvation laboratory experiments show that the neuroendocrine
abnormalities and changes in gastric functioning that arise from experimentally induced starvation are similar to those observed in clients
with eating disorders (Frichter & Pirke, 1995; Kaye & Oberndorfer, 2010; Singh, 2002). The evidence also shows that more pronounced
changes occur in anorexia compared with bulimia. Most of the starvation-related neuroendocrine changes occur in the hypothalamic-
pituitary-gonadal axis that governs reproductive functioning; the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the hypothalamic-pituitary-


thyroid axis that govern mood, appetite, arousal and other vegetative functions. There is also evidence that starvation leads to delayed
gastric emptying and that this reduces hunger perception. Neuroimaging studies show that anorexia and bulimia lead to reduced cortical
mass and altered functioning of the taste and reward processing regions of the brain, with some degree of normalisation after recovery
(Kaye & Oberndorfer, 2010; Phillipou et al., 2014). These biological changes are accompanied by a preoccupation with eating, a heightened
sense of being full, an increased ability to rigidly regulate negative mood states, rigid obsessionality and social withdrawal (Fairburn, 2008).
Rigid obsessionality and difficulty set-shifting are predisposing neuropsychological traits for anorexia which are exacerbated by starvation-
related biological abnormalities (Kanakam & Treasure, 2013). One implication of starvation theories is that a distinction should be made
between re-feeding programmes which initially aim to reverse the starvation process in anorexia by helping clients regain weight to help
them become accessible to psychological therapy, and later therapy which aims to help clients maintain normal body weight and eating
patterns.
It has been proposed that eating disorders are an expression of an underlying mood disorder (Vögele & Gibson, 2010). Depression is often
present in the family histories of people with eating disorders, along with other mood regulation difficulties such as substance misuse
and borderline personality disorder. If anorexia and bulimia are fundamentally mood disorders, then a plausible hypothesis is that eating
disorders arise from a dysregulation of the serotonergic neurotransmission system in those centres of the brain that subserve mood, similar
to that found in depression. Considerable evidence suggests that abnormalities in the serotonergic neurotransmission system contribute to
dysregulation of mood as well as appetite and impulse control in eating disorders (Kaye & Oberndorfer, 2010). The neurotransmission/mood
dysregulation hypothesis has led to controlled trials of antidepressants for eating disorders. Both selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have been found to lead to short-term improvements in bulimia, but have limited impact on
anorexia nervosa (Hay & Claudino, 2012; McElroy et al., 2010; Wilson & Fairburn, 2007). When CBT for bulimia nervosa is ineffective, SSRIs
may be added as an adjunct to CBT.


Cognitive-Behavioural Maintaining Factors
In cognitive-behavioural models of eating disorders it is proposed that certain people are rendered vulnerable to eating disorders because of
personal and environmental predisposing factors, and that once an eating disorder is precipitated by life stresses, cognitive and behavioural
factors maintain the disorder (Fairburn, 2008; Wilson, 2010). Predisposing factors, such as those listed in Table 22.5, contribute to the
development of negative beliefs such as 'I am worthless,' 'I am unlovable' or 'I am unattractive.' These core beliefs lead to the development of
assumptions such as 'I must be thin to be attractive, successful or happy,' 'I must do everything perfectly, for people to love me' or 'I must
punish myself to be good.' While these beliefs and assumptions develop during childhood, they do not have a significant effect on the client's
life until they are activated by a series of critical stressful demands of adolescence and early adulthood. These precipitating factors include
pressures to become emotionally and vocationally independent and competent, and pressures to be socially acceptable and thin. Once core
beliefs and assumptions have been activated, in specific day-to-day trigger situations, they give rise to negative automatic thoughts
conducive to dieting. For example, when dressing or looking in the mirror, the client may think 'I'm too heavy, too fat and too ugly'; or when
hungry or eating the client may think 'I'm not in control.' These negative automatic thoughts typically involve cognitive distortions such as
those listed in Table 22.6. These distorted negative automatic thoughts maintain restrained eating in both anorexia and bulimia. With
anorexia, restrained eating is also maintained by the sense of control, self-worth and 'being special' that comes from achieving a thin body
shape. Avoidance of fatness also maintains restrained eating, although the margin of safety required to avoid fatness increases as the
disorder progresses. Furthermore, the process of starvation induces cognitive inflexibility, which strengthens the cognitive distortions, such
as black-and-white thinking, that characterises the thinking of clients with anorexia, which in turn maintains dietary restriction. Family
and peer group approval for thinness also reinforces dietary restraint. In bulimia, a different pattern occurs. After a period of restraint
certain stressful trigger situations lead to binge eating, which in turn triggers guilt for overeating and related negative automatic thoughts
about shape and weight, which in turn leads to compensatory vomiting, laxative use and other forms of purging, and a commitment to


redouble dietary restraint. Fairburn's formulation (2008) of this process is given later in the section on CBT for bulimia. A behavioural
pattern of weighing and checking the size of body parts increases the salience of perceived deficits in body weight and shape (in the case of
bulimia) and perceived thinness (in the case of anorexia), which in turn increases motivation for restrained eating. For young adults with
bulimia, cognitive-behavioural therapy is the treatment of choice (Hay, 2013; NICE, 2004; Wilson & Fairburn, 2007). This therapy, described
later, helps clients to map out the binge-purge cycle, to monitor eating patterns and related cognitions and contingencies and use cognitive
and behavioural strategies to disrupt the cycle and manage relapses. There is also some evidence for the effectiveness of CBT for anorexia
(Galsworthy-Francis & Allan, 2014; Hay, 2013).
Table 22.6 Cognitive Distortions
• All-or-nothing thinking. Thinking in extreme categorical terms. For example, 'If I'm not in complete control, then I have no control
whatsoever'; or 'If I'm not thin, I must be fat.'
• Catastrophising. Thinking about the worst possible outcome and assuming it will definitely occur. For example, 'If I eat a biscuit, I will
definitely binge all day.'
• Magnification and minimization, or discounting positive qualities. Exaggerating the significance of negative experiences or personal
weaknesses and discounting the significance of positive experiences or personal strengths. For example, 'I gained a pound, so I know that
I will never be able to wear a miniskirt again'; or 'I didn't binge all week, but that doesn't count because I binged all weekend.'
• Selective attention. Selectively attending to information that is consistent with a negative view of the self. Clients who look for fatness
find it, and fail to see small steps towards weight control. Clients who look for failure find it, and fail to see small successes.
• Selective abstraction. Selectively focusing on a small aspect of a situation and drawing conclusions from this. For example, 'I will only be
a good if I am thin and nothing else matters.'
• Overgeneralization. Generalizing from one instance to all possible instances. For example, 'I ate too much last night, so I will always eat
too much'; or 'I failed to control my weight, therefore I am a complete failure.'


• Personalization. Attributing real or imagined negative characteristics to the self without supportive evidence. For example, 'If people
see me, I will ruin their day because I'm fat.'
• Emotional reasoning. Taking feelings as facts. For example, 'I feel fat, so I am fat.'
• Mental filtering. Focusing on one negative aspect of a situation and filtering out all positive aspects of the situation. For example,
thinking that one person at work is thinner than I am (while filtering out the fact that 25 people are not).
• Mind-reading. Assuming without evidence that other people are thinking negative things about you. For example, 'I know by the way
they are looking at me that they think I'm really fat.'
• Double standards. Having more stringent standards for the self than for others. For example, 'It's OK for others to be a few pounds
overweight, but it's not OK for me.'
Interpersonal Maintaining Factors
In interpersonal therapy (IPT) for bulimia, it is assumed that the four categories of interpersonal difficulties listed in Table 22.7 maintain
eating disorders: grief, role disputes, role transitions and interpersonal deficits – a position supported by a growing body of evidence
(Tanofsky-Kraff & Wilfley, 2010). Interpersonal therapy, which is an effective treatment for bulimia and in some cases of anorexia, alleviates
these conditions by helping clients resolve problems in these areas that maintain the pattern of bingeing and purging (Wilson & Fairburn,
2007). A detailed account of IPT for bulimia is given later.
Family factors constitute a subset of interpersonal factors that maintain eating disorders. Available empirical evidence clearly shows
that there is not a single dysfunctional family constellation (a psychosomatic family) that causes anorexia and bulimia (Holtom-Viesel &
Allan, 2014). Families of individuals with eating disorders report worse family functioning than other families with parents and caregivers
experiencing considerable distress, accommodating to eating disorders or showing high levels of expressed emotion, and those with more
positive perceptions of family functioning generally have a more positive outcomes, irrespective of severity of eating disorder (Anastasiadou

et al., 2014; Downs & Blow, 2013; Holtom-Viesel & Allan, 2014). Family dysfunction, especially among young adults living with their
parents, probably reflects families' attempts to cope with eating disorders which inadvertently maintain problematic eating habits. (Dodge,
2012). The Maudsley model of family therapy of eating disorders is particular effective for treating adolescents who are living with their
parents, but is not appropriate for adults (Downs & Blow, 2013; Le Grange & Lock, 2007; Lock & Le Grange, 2012). Psychoeducational
interventions for caregivers of people with eating disorders can reduce carer distress (Hibbs et al., 2015).
Table 22.7 Interpersonal Maintaining Factors
Grief associated with the loss of a loved one.
Role disputes involving family members, friends or colleagues.
Role transitions such as starting or ending relationships within the family or work context, moving jobs or houses, graduation,
promotion, retirement or diagnosis of an illness.
Interpersonal deficits, particularly poor social skills for making and maintaining relationships.
Psychodynamic Maintaining Factors
Psychoanalytic explanations of eating disorders focus on the role of intrapsychic factors in the genesis and maintenance of eating pathology.
Hilda Bruch (1973, 1978) argued that the psychodynamics which underpin anorexia arise from early childhood experiences. According to
Bruch, the mothers of anorexic girls adopt a parenting style in which parental needs for control and compliance take primacy over the
child's needs for self-expression and autonomy. The child has difficulty learning how to interpret need-related internal physiological states
and in developing a coherent sense of self separate from caregivers. In adolescence the fear of fatness, obsession with food and guilt for
eating are part of an attempt to manage a central conflict related to the attainment of autonomy and a coherent sense of self. The young


person experiences a fear of separation from parents and a fear of being overly controlled by the parents; a fear of maturation, sexuality,
intimacy and independence; and a fear of having little control over the self or body size (as a symbol of self). This conflict about autonomy
is characterised by low self-esteem coupled with perfectionistic strivings to improve the self. Among people with eating disorders there
is ample evidence for distorted body image, low interoception, maturity fears, perfectionism, low self-esteem, the use of suppression as
a coping strategy, and low self-directedness (Cassin & von Ranson, 2005; Jacobi et al., 2004; Jacobi & Fittig, 2010). There is also some
evidence for problematic parent-child relationships as precursors of eating disorders (Jacobi & Fittig, 2010; Striegel-Moore & Bulik, 2007).
Overconcerned parenting in childhood is a risk factor for anorexia. Parental criticism about weight, high expectations and low contact with
parents in adolescence are associated with bulimia. Parental criticism has an important negative effect on the course of eating disorders
(Dodge, 2012).
Results of a small number of trials suggest that psychodynamic psychotherapy, including cognitive analytic therapy (CAT; Newell, 2012)
may be effective as a treatment for eating disorders in adults, but not adolescents (Dancyger et al., 2013; Newell, 2012; Thompson-Brenner
et al., 2009). The Maudsley group, in their controlled trials of psychodynamic psychotherapy with young adults, working within the context
of Malan's (1995) psychodynamic therapy model, have found that a unique psychodynamic focal hypothesis may be formed for each
patient and that Bruch's themes typically characterise these focal hypotheses. Psychoanalytic psychotherapy, as practised by the Maudsley
group, aims to help the patient gain insight into the way in which the psychodynamics of past relationships with parents underpin the
transference-countertransference, patient-therapist relationship and the relationships that the patient has with other significant people in
their lives. In addition, psychoanalytic psychotherapy facilitates the patient's search for less destructive ways to assert autonomy from the
parents and develop a strong sense of personal identity. This focal approach to psychodynamic psychotherapy is described in Chapter 4.
In CAT the therapist helps the client identify chains of events, thoughts, emotions and motivations that explain how the eating disorder is
established and maintained (Newell, 2012). In addition to identifying such sequences, the therapists helps clients identify reciprocal roles,
for example neglect-abandonment, which occurred in early life and are repeated in adult relationships, and which partly maintain eating

disorders. The aim of CAT is to enable the client to recognise these patterns, understand their origins, and subsequently learn alternative
strategies in order to cope better.
Treatment Effectiveness
At the time of writing this chapter CBT and IPT are the treatments of choice for bulimia nervosa in adults, although the evidence-base
is greater for CBT (APA, 2006; Hay, 2013; NICE, 2004). In contrast, no specific treatment has shown greater efficacy than any other for
anorexia and a combination of renourishment and psychotherapy (including CBT, IPT, CAT and focal psychodynamic psychotherapy) is
recommended (APA, 2006; NICE, 2004; Watson & Bulik, 2013).
Much of the evidence for effective treatment of eating disorders is based on studies of individual face-to-face therapy. There is growing
evidence for the effectiveness of interventions (especially CBT) delivered in group therapy (Polnay et al., 2014) and computer-based, self-help
formats (Aardoom et al., 2013; Beintner et al., 2014; Dölemeyer et al., 2013; Loucas et al., 2014). There is also a good argument for offering
these less resource intensive interventions first, within the context of a stepped-care model of service delivery, and only offering individual
therapy if these less intensive interventions are ineffective.
Engagement
In order to benefit from assessment and treatment, clients with eating disorders need to engage effectively with services and establish a good
working alliance with clinicians providing that service (Zaitsoff et al., 2015). This is often challenging because of the ambivalence many
clients with eating disorders have about seeking treatment. Many clients with eating disorders drop out of treatment early (DeJong et al.,
2012). Therefore special attention needs to be devoted to the process of engagement. A useful approach is motivational interviewing which
is based on the transtheoretical stages of change model.


Stages of Change
In the transtheoretical stages of change model distinctions are made between the stages of precontemplation, contemplation, preparation,
action and maintenance (Miller & Rollnick, 2012; Prochaska & Velicer, 1997a, 1997b; Treasure & Bauer, 2003). Clients at the
precontemplation stage deny that they have a problem and usually have come for assessment at the request of a family member or concerned
person. Their aim in seeking consultation is to prevent the family member or concerned person from nagging them about their eating
pattern or weight. Those at the contemplation stage accept that there is a problem but are ambivalent about resolving it. People in these early
stages of change require an opportunity to discuss whether or not they think they have a significant problems, and if they agree that they do,
it is useful to discuss the costs and benefits of trying to change. Some of the costs and benefits of eating disorders are given in Table 22.4.
Offering clients at the precontemplation or contemplation stages advice on how to change may lead to resistance or treatment dropout.
Clients at the preparation stage have accepted that they have an eating disorder and want to make effective plans to overcome it. Those at the
action stage are currently trying to overcome their disorder. Autonomous motivation to change at intake is associated with later therapeutic
changes in restrictive eating, bingeing, and negative cognitive states associated with eating disorders (Clausen et al., 2013). Those at the
maintenance stage have overcome the disorder but require help with relapse prevention and management. To maximise their chances of
success, clients at the preparation, action and maintenance stages require evidence-based treatments that involve planning and
implementing strategies to overcome eating problems. At intake interviews the majority of clients are in precontemplation or contemplation
stages of change. Thus, most clients that come to psychologists either deny that there is a problem or are ambivalent about resolving their
eating problems. On the one hand, they wish to feel better and healthier or appease the concerned family member who has arranged the
appointment. On the other hand, they may wish to retain what they view as the benefits of their disorder, including a slim shape, low weight,
and approval from others (in anorexia), and the prospect of these factors (in bulimia). Both anorexia and bulimia may also involve a tenuous
sense of being in control or of being special for engaging in restrained eating.

Motivational Interviewing
Clients in precontemplation and contemplation stages of change may benefit from motivational interviewing, which helps people move
from precontemplation and contemplation to preparation, action and maintenance stages of change (Macdonald et al., 2012; Miller &
Rollnick, 2012). There are six key aspects to motivational interviewing: (1) understand clients' frames of reference; (2) express acceptance
and affirmation of clients and their frames of reference; (3) when summarising and feeding back what clients have said, give prominence to
statements which indicated that they recognise that they have a problem that they may wish to change, and give less emphasis to statements
about maintaining the status quo; (4) use questions that elicit emotive statements from clients in which they recognise that they have
problem about which they are concerned, which they believe they can change, and which they intend to change; (5) match interventions to
the stage of change and do not jump ahead of the client, by for example proceeding to preparation when the client is still at contemplation
and needs to explore the pros and cons of change; and (6) affirm the client's freedom of choice and self-direction. Motivational interviewing
works by reducing the sort of resistance elicited by confrontation, and by fostering a strong therapeutic alliance through collaboration.
Assessment
Alongside the process of engagement and establishment of a therapeutic alliance, comprehensive assessment should be conducted.
Assessment should be carried out by a multidisciplinary team and cover the client's physical, nutritional and psychological states (Anderson
& Murray, 2010; APA, 2006; Bell et al., 2001; Katzman et al., 2010; NICE, 2004; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2002, 2010). Assessment
should include individual interviews with clients and collateral or conjoint interviews with partners, parents or concerned others.
Assessment interviews may cover the circumstances of referral; the primary concerns of the client and of the concerned person if such a
person prompted the referral; the client's current daily eating, starving, bingeing and exercising patterns and cognitions related to these;

history of dieting, weight and menstruation; use of diuretics; medical, psychological and social history; history of previous psychological
and psychiatric treatment for eating disorders and other disorders; history and current status of possible comorbid disorders including
depression, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), drug and alcohol misuse, or borderline personality disorder; and possible
predisposing, precipitating and maintaining factors relevant to the eating disorder. Where appropriate, dietary histories may be taken in
conjoint interviews with a nutritionist.
A full medical examination should routinely be conducted to assess current health, medical risk, and inpatient care needs. Criteria for
inpatient care are described later. Height and weight measurements may taken to determine body mass index (BMI). BMI is calculated by
dividing the weight in kilograms by the height in meters squared. A normal BMI falls between about 19 and 25. Precautions must be taken to
ensure that clients do not artificially increase their weight by putting weights in their pockets or drinking excess fluid prior to weighing.
Some psychometric instruments that may be useful in the assessment of clients with eating disorders are listed at the end of the chapter.
Of these, the Eating Disorder Examination interview (EDE) which is contained in Fairburn (2008) is considered the diagnostic gold standard.
The Eating Disorder Examination questionnaire (EDE-Q) and Clinical Impairment Assessment (CIA) which are contained in Fairburn (2008)
offer a useful self-report assessment of symptoms and the extent to which eating disorder pathology is interfering with global functioning.
The third edition of the Eating Disorder Inventory (Garner, 2005) is the most comprehensive and best validated self-report psychological
assessment instrument for assessing eating pathology and related psychological traits.
On the basis of the assessment a preliminary syndromal formulation may be drawn up. This should link predisposing, precipitating and
maintaining factors to the abnormal eating pattern and specify protective factors that may be drawn on during treatment. For both most
models of psychotherapy, such as CBT, IPT and CAT, an additional process formulation is developed, and sharing such formulations with
clients is central to the treatment process.

Treatment
Transdiagnostic Cognitive Behavioural Treatment of Eating Disorders
Fariburn (2008) has developed a manualised transdiagnostic 'enhanced' CBT programme for eating disorders which incorporates and extends his previous CBT programme for bulimia (Fairburn et al., 1993). The manual describes a 'default' 20-session programme which is usually appropriate for bulimia and less severe cases of anorexia. In this programme behavioural and psychoeducational strategies are used to disrupt restricted eating and the binge-purge cycle, and cognitive procedures are used to modify weight- and shape-related belief systems that underpin this problematic eating behaviour. There is also an intensive 40-session version of the programme for clients with entrenched difficulties. This intensive programme contains three additional modules that target core low self-esteem, clinical perfectionism and interpersonal problems.
In Fairburn's (2008) enhanced CBT model, treatment is divided into four stages. In the first stage, clients are helped to understand the cognitive behavioural view of the maintenance of eating disorders, create a personalised CBT formulation, and see the implications of this for resolving their eating problems. Three key interventions in the first stage are establishing a routine of in-session weighing, self-monitoring, and using behavioural techniques to help clients begin to replace the binge-eating pattern with a more normal eating pattern. The first stage spans seven sessions over a 4-week period. Holding sessions twice weekly maximises the chances of therapeutic change. Research shows that early improvement is a predictor of positive long-term outcome.
Stage 2 spans only two sessions. For patients who are not underweight, these and subsequent sessions in stage 3 are scheduled weekly. The main aims in this stage are to review progress, refine the formulation in light of new information that has emerged in stage 1, and make specific treatment plans to address obstacles to progress if clients are not responding to treatment. It is at this stage decisions are made about whether to use the default 20-session programme or the intensive 40-session programme.

In stage 3, which spans eight weekly sessions in the default 20-session programme, a range of behavioural and cognitive interventions are
used to address the processes that are maintaining the client's eating disorder. Attempts are made to establish healthy eating habits with a
particular focus on eliminating dieting. Clients also learn to challenge the beliefs and values concerning shape, weight and self-worth that
are maintaining their eating disorder. Maintenance of therapeutic gains and relapse prevention are the focus of the fourth stage of therapy,
which involves three fortnightly sessions. A follow-up appointment is scheduled for 20 weeks after the end of therapy.
Stage 1. Rationale for CBT Treatment of Bulimia and Addressing Binge Eating
The main goals of the first stage are to establish the rationale for a CBT approach to treatment, provide psychoeducation about eating
disorders and CBT, establish a routine for regular in-session weighing and between session self-monitoring, and replace binge eating with
a regular eating pattern. The psychologist initially develops a therapeutic relationship with the client through the process of history
taking, presenting a CBT formulation of the client's binge-purge cycle, and offering a contract for treatment. With history taking, detailed
information is gathered on the client's goals; eating habits (including daily eating pattern, dieting and bingeing); weight control methods
(including self-induced vomiting; use of laxatives, purgatives and diuretics; and exercise); attitudes to shape and weight (including the
importance attached to shape and weight, desired weight, and cognitive, emotional and behavioural reactions to comments about shape
and weight); development of eating problems; changes in weight over time; past treatment (including what was and was not useful); and
attitudes to future treatment. Clients are also invited to complete the complete the EDE-Q and CIA.
Collaborative Formulation
In presenting the formulation, the model in Figure 22.1 is used. For clients with bulimia, usually binge eating is presented as the central
concern. The client wishes to stop bingeing, but feels out of control. With this in mind, certain key points should be made in presenting the
formulation. First, dieting maintains binge eating because it leads to feelings of intense hunger and negative affect. Second, this negative
affect is intensified in specific trigger situations. Clients interpret these trigger situations (such as noticing that they are not slim) in a

negative way (due to perfectionism, black-and-white thinking, or other cognitive distortions) and these negative appraisals intensify
negative mood states. For example, they may think 'I want to be slim, I never will be, I feel terrible, eating is the only thing that will comfort
me.' Binge eating is a short-term way of improving the negative mood states associated with these negative automatic thoughts. Third,
vomiting and purging also maintain binge eating because clients hold the mistaken belief that these are effective methods for calorie control,
and the act of vomiting brings relief because of these erroneous beliefs. For example, a client may hold the following beliefs: 'I've stuffed
myself and I will get very fat unless I get this food out of my system now. I must be perfectly thin or I'm no good, I feel completely guilty for
having eaten so much and having no will power, so I'll vomit. That's a relief, now that I've vomited. I will diet from now on.' Fourth, the belief
that high self-worth will arise from a slim shape and low weight promotes extreme dieting, in part because clients adopt a perfectionistic
thinking style and tend to think in black-and-white terms. For example, clients may hold beliefs such as 'I must be the perfect shape
otherwise no one will like me' or 'Either I'm thin and good or I'm fat and bad, there is no middle ground.' Fifth, over-concern about shape and
weight is linked to long-standing negative self-evaluation. This may include beliefs that the client has little intrinsic worth as a person and
has very little power to change this, except through maintaining a slim shape and low weight. While these general issues should be
addressed in presenting the formulation, it should be customised in each case to the unique circumstances and beliefs of the client in
question. It is useful to draw the formulation, as given in Figure 22.1, for the client working from the bottom of the diagram (the bingeing
and vomiting cycle) upwards. The formulation may be revisited throughout the process of treatment, but especially in this stage.
Psychoeducation
Psychoeducation about eating disorders is also covered in the first stage of treatment. This should be given orally. As homework assignments
clients may also be invited to read chapters of self-help books such as Fairburn's (2013) Overcoming Binge Eating and Lucas's (2008)
Demystifying Anorexia Nervosa. Other CBT self-help books on eating disorders are listed at the end of the chapter. Clients are informed about
how to calculate the BMI and, using BMI norms, to set a weight goal that does not involve dieting. Psychoeducation also covers the physical

and psychological consequences of self-starvation; bingeing and vomiting; the ineffectiveness of vomiting, laxative and diuretic use as
means of weight control; and the fact that dieting inevitably leads to intense hunger, loss of control and bingeing. The negative consequences
of self-starvation, bingeing, vomiting and using purgatives should be stressed. Anorexia leads to reduction in bone density (osteoporosis),
which results in dry, brittle bones; muscle loss and abnormal weakness; slow heart rate and low blood pressure, severe dehydration, which
can result in kidney failure; dry hair and skin; lanugo all over the body; and amenorrhea and possible infertility. Bulimia leads to electrolyte
imbalance, salivary gland enlargement (leading to a chubby face), erosion of dental enamel, intermittent oedema, and menstruation
irregularities. Other negative consequences of eating disorders are listed in Table 22.4.
Treatment Contract
When clients understand their CBT formulation they may be offered a contract for treatment. The client is informed that the treatment will
span about 20 sessions (although this will be reviewed after seven sessions); that it is likely to be effective in about two out of three cases and
so is not a guaranteed cure; that the client will be invited to compete tasks between sessions; and that a strong commitment to therapy and
to following through on therapeutic tasks is essential for success. The treatment tasks aim to break the cycles contained in the formulation
model in Figure 22.1. Clients may be told that initially treatment will focus on their central concerns, the behaviour pattern of restricted
eating or bingeing and vomiting at the bottom on Figure 22.1, but for treatment to be effective, later they must focus on dieting. In particular
they must address their beliefs about themselves, their weight, and their shape that underpin chronic dieting, since chronic dieting sets the
stage for bingeing or self-starvation.
Self-Monitoring
The first homework task is to complete self-monitoring sheets on which clients record exactly what they eat each day, the time when it
is eaten, the place, whether the client considered the episode of eating to be a binge, whether it was followed by vomiting or laxative use,
and the overall circumstances and context under which the eating occurred. A self-monitoring form is presented in Table 22.2. The second

and all subsequent sessions include a review of self-monitoring forms. In the final column of the self-monitoring form, clients record the
situation and their thoughts about it. Throughout treatment, by regularly reviewing this material clients may be helped to identify negative
automatic thoughts, cognitive distortions, assumptions and core beliefs that underpin their eating disorder.
Session Format
Sessions in CBT for eating disorders follow a set format. They typically last 50 minutes. In the first part, in-session weighing occurs. Then
homework assignments and self-monitoring forms are reviewed. An agenda for the session is set informed partly by information from self-
monitoring forms and the overall curriculum of the CBT programme. The agenda items are then covered in a collaborative way. In the final
part of each session, the material covered is the session is summarised, clients are invited to complete homework tasks and the next session
is scheduled.
Prescribing a Regular Eating Pattern
Clients are given the following advice on eating habits. First, eat three meals per day, and two or three planned snacks, spaced no more than
3 hours apart. Meals should not be followed by vomiting, the use of diuretics, purgatives or intense exercise, and other unplanned eating
should be avoided. Where eating habits are severely disturbed, this regular pattern should be introduced gradually. This task aims to both
regularise eating habits and shows clients that the eating pattern does not result in weight gain.
Stimulus Control
Stimulus control techniques may be introduced to help clients adhere to a regular eating pattern. These include not engaging in other
activities (such as watching TV) while eating, and savouring their food; confining eating to one place and formalising the eating process by
setting the table and so forth; limiting the supply of food available while eating by putting out the required amount and putting the packet
away before the meal starts; practising leaving food on the plate; throwing away leftovers; keeping as little 'danger food' (such as chocolate)


in the house as possible; planning shopping lists when not hungry and sticking to them; and avoiding finishing food on the plates of other
family members.
Planning Alternatives to Bingeing and Vomiting
Clients may be invited to predict trigger situations where they are at risk of bingeing and vomiting, and to develop lists of alternative
behaviours in which they can engage to avoid bingeing and vomiting. Such behaviours may include talking to a partner or parent, phoning a
friend, playing music, taking gentle exercise, or having a bath.
Managing Vomiting
To reduce the frequency of vomiting, clients may be invited to select meals or snacks which induce a lower urge to vomit, and to carefully
plan to engage in distracting activities for an hour following eating to avoid vomiting.
Managing Laxative and Diuretic use
To reduce the frequency of laxative and diuretic use, the ineffectiveness of these drugs in preventing food absorption should be explained.
Then clients may be invited to discard their supply of such drugs in one step or a series of gradual steps. Sometimes there is a brief temporary
rebound effect after ceasing diuretic use during which weight increases, and clients should be warned of this.
Excessive Exercise
Where clients use excessive exercise to manage weight, this may be recorded on the self-monitoring form in the right-hand column. Client
may be invited to consider the adverse effects of excessive exercising such as risk of injury, the ineffectiveness of exercise in leading to
significant weight loss, and the extent to which excessive exercise leaves little time for other valued activities.
Involving Significant Others
Significant others may be involved in treatment, if clients indicate that they may be of potential support in helping the client make positive


changes, or if they are making it difficult for the client to improve (by for example making negative comments about their body shape or
eating disorder behaviours). A clear rationale should be developed for involving them in sessions. This may be explained at the outset of
conjoint sessions. Significant others may be invited to offer their views on how the client's eating disorder affects them and how they are
trying to support the client's recovery. The client may then be invited to describe how the significant other could optimally support their
recovery. In about three-quarters of adult cases, it may be necessary to offer up to three conjoint appointments with significant others. (With
adolescents, far greater parental involvement is required.)
Stage 2. Taking Stock, Reformulating and Planning
In stage 2, over two sessions, progress is reviewed. To assess progress clients may be invited to complete the EDE-Q and the CIA. The extent
to which clients are attending sessions, completing self-monitoring forms, not weighing themselves frequently at home, reading assigned
self-help literature, eating regular meals, and not engaging in compensatory behaviours (vomiting, laxative use and over-exercising) are
noted. If good progress is being made, the initial formulation is probably a fairly accurate guide on which to progress. Moving to stage 3 of
the programme is, therefore, straightforward. However, many clients - despite showing improvements in eating patterns and compensatory
behaviours - do not consider their progress to be good because of their remaining concerns about body shape which have not been addressed.
It is these cognitive aspects of eating disorders that are the focus of stage 3.
If little progress has been made in stage 1 due to unforeseen obstacles, then the formulation may be modified to take account of these
obstacles. In some instances lack of progress may be due to comorbid depression, which may be treated with antidepressants and CBT
for depression (which is described in Chapter 9). Once the depression lifts, CBT for eating disorders may be resumed. Where comorbid
conditions such as anxiety, substance use or personality disorders are present, the extent to which treatment of these problems can be
incorporated into the 'default' 20-session or intensive 40-session programme will require evaluation. Fear of change or rigid resistance to
change may also prevent progress. This resistance may be addressed with motivational interviewing strategies.

Three specific obstacles which occur in a proportion of cases deserve particular attention: perfectionism, core low self-esteem and
interpersonal problems. Where two or more of these problems are present, or where a patient's BMI is below 17.5, the more intensive 40-
session version of the CBT programme should be offered. In stage 4 for clients in the intensive programme, part of each session should be
allocated to eating disorder issues (as outlined in the section on stage 4), and part of each session should focus on the broader issues of self-
esteem, perfectionism or interpersonal problems. Descriptions of the perfectionism, and self-esteem modules are given later after stages 3
and 4 of the default programme have been outlined. The interpersonal module is an abbreviated version of IPT which is described later in the
chapter.
Stage 3. Reducing Dieting, Improving Problem Solving and Challenging Cognitive Distortions
Throughout stages 3 and 4, processes begun in stage 1 are continued. These include completing self-monitoring forms, avoiding home
weighing, reading assigned self-help literature, eating regular meals and not engaging in compensatory behaviours
The main elements of the third stage, which spans about 8 weeks, are identifying the over-evaluation of shape, weight and their control as
the core issue maintaining the eating disorder; enhancing the importance of other areas of self-evaluation; addressing shape checking and
avoidance; addressing 'feeling fat'; learning to control the eating disorder mindset; and exploring the origins of over-evaluation of shape,
weight and their control.
Over-Evaluation of Weight/Shape/Dieting and its Consequences
To highlight the effects of over-evaluation of weight/shape/dieting on their lives and open up possibilities for change, clients may be
invited to draw a pie chart with each slice representing an area of activity within their lives that affects their self-evaluation (e.g. family
life, work, shape/weight/dieting, recreation). The size of each slice should reflect the extent to which the area is important in the client's
self-evaluation. For clients with eating disorders, the pie-slice representing shape/weight/dieting is usually very large, and other areas (e.g.
family life, work, recreation) are usually comparatively small. Clients may then be invited to consider the effects of over-evaluation shape/

weight/dieting on their lives. It is risky because we can never fully control our weight; there are always others who seem more attractive; and
it leads to behaviour that is harmful including excessive dieting, bingeing, vomiting, excessive laxative use and over-exercising. All of this
leads to considerable distress. This process of over-evaluation also sets up vicious cycles that maintain eating problems. Marginalising other
areas of life; shape and weight checking and avoidance of viewing certain aspects of the body; mislabelling negative states as 'feeling fat'; and
preoccupation with thoughts about shape and weight all are caused by over-evaluation of shape/weight/dieting, and maintain it.
Enhancing the Importance of Other Areas of Self-Evaluation
To enhance the importance of other life areas for self-evaluation, provide clients with a rationale for doing this. Point out the very dominant
role of shape/weight/dieting and the relatively small role of other areas of their life in their self-evaluation pie chart. Invite them to discuss
new activities that might interest them, regularly engage in one or two of these, record this in the final column of their self-monitoring form,
and review the effects of this in therapy sessions on a weekly basis. If there are barriers to this process, problem-solving training may be
offered as way of addressing these.
Problem Solving
Invite clients to first break big vague problems into many smaller specific problems to be tackled one at a time. Second, define each of these
in solvable terms. Third, focus on solving the specific problem at hand, not attacking the person or people involved in the problem or simply
leaving the problem unresolved. Fourth, generate many possible solutions to the problem in hand. Fifth, when all solutions are generated,
examine the pros and cons of each and select the best. Sixth, implement this solution, review progress and modify the solution if it is not
working. Finally, repeat this sequence as often as is necessary to solve the problem and celebrate success. This process may be used for other
aspects of treatment for example, dealing with trigger situations that precede bingeing.
Mood Intolerance
For clients whose bingeing is triggered by extreme negative mood states (some of whom may meet the criteria for borderline personality

disorder), strategies for helping them develop a tolerance for negative mood states may be used, which are based on dialectical behaviour
therapy, described in Chapter 27 (Bankoff et al., 2012; Linehan, 1993). These clients may also engage in non-suicidal self-harm or drug
misuse as well as bingeing to control negative emotional states. Therapists may first help clients to understand the sequence or chain of
events leading from a trigger to binge eating and to the aftermath of this. For each episode this sequence includes (1) the trigger (e.g.
an argument), (2) the immediate appraisal (e.g. resentment), (3) a negative mood (e.g. anger), (4) appraisal and rapid amplification of the
negative mood (e.g. 'I can't stand this feeling. I REALLY CAN'T STAND IT!!'), (5) dysfunctional self-soothing (e.g. bingeing or self-harming),
(6) immediate relief and (7) negative self-appraisal (e.g. 'I'm a failure and have no control over my eating'). Clients are then invited to self-
monitor the occurrence of triggers and the early stages of these episodes. As soon as a trigger occurs, they should go to a quiet place and
write down (1) the trigger (e.g. an argument), (2) the immediate appraisal (e.g. resentment), (3) a negative mood (e.g. anger), (4) appraisal
and rapid amplification of the negative mood (e.g. 'I can't stand this feeling. I REALLY CAN'T STAND IT!!'). This helps clients slow down the
process, become aware of it, and tolerate the negative mood state without escaping by bingeing or self-harming. A range of strategies may
then be used to help clients develop mood tolerance skills. Problem solving, described earlier, may be used to help clients prevent trigger
situations occurring. Cognitive restructuring may be used to help clients reappraise triggering situations. Clients may be helped to develop
mood acceptance skills. This involves recognising and labelling their moods, and understanding that they are brief and will pass. It also
involves practising positive self-soothing skills including talking to others, listening to music, watching a movie, taking a bath, exercising,
relaxing and meditating.
Shape and Weight Checking and Avoidance
People with eating disorders regularly check their shape (by looking in mirrors or touching parts of their bodies to check that they can feel
their bones), and this maintains their dissatisfaction with their body shape by giving very frequent information about their (undesirable)
body shape. If frequent checking becomes too distressing, this may be replaced with avoidance strategies. Clients may avoid viewing certain

aspects of the body by not looking in mirrors, wearing baggy clothes and not looking at photographs. This may maintain fears or concerns
about body shape by depriving them of accurate feedback on body shape. Client may be invited to use a self-monitoring form to record all
instances where they check their body shape, compare their body shape to that of others, or avoid viewing their body shape. When reviewing
the self-monitoring forms, negative effects of checking and avoiding may be identified. Clients may be invited to classify checking routines
into two categories: checking that is infrequent and useful, which should be continued (e.g. looking in the mirror when preparing to leave for
work in the morning); and checking that is frequent and distressing, which should be discontinued. For clients who have many mirrors and
use them frequently, they should be advised to remove all but a face mirror (for applying makeup or shaving) and a full-length mirror (for
checking overall appearance). For clients who check their shape by making frequent (biased) comparisons between their body shape and that
of others, invite them to reduce the frequency of this. Also invite them to use strategies such as only making comparisons with people who
are in the same age and height category, to prevent them from comparing themselves to unreasonable comparators such as media celebrities.
For clients who avoid viewing their body shape, exposure tasks are the appropriate interventions. This involves not dressing and undressing
in the dark, routinely checking themselves in full-length mirrors each day, not wearing baggy clothes, and engaging in activities where they
see their bodies such as swimming or yoga.
Addressing 'Feeling Fat'
The experience of 'feeling fat' is very distressing for people with eating disorders. The extent to which people feel fat fluctuates over time
and is not correlated with body weight, which is relatively constant. Episodes of feeling fat usually occur when people are in negative mood
states or when they focus attention on their bodies. Negative moods may be triggered when bored, lonely or hung-over, or as a result of body
checking or making comparisons with very thin people. Feeling hot, wearing tight clothes, or moving so fat on the body wobbles may cause
people to focus on their bodies. Clients may be invited to complete self-monitoring forms to record when they feel fat, and the mood states,

situations and degree to which they focus on their bodies during these experiences. They may then use problem solving to deal with triggers
for feeling fat, or use cognitive strategies such as relabelling these experiences to make them less distressing.
Controlling the Eating Disorder Mindset: Cognitive Restructuring
Eating disorder behaviour including dieting, bingeing, vomiting and over-exercising, and eating disorder experiences such as being
preoccupied with food, 'feeling fat' and cognitive distortions, are driven by negative mood states that arise from the core eating disorder
mindset: over-evaluation of shape/weight/control of eating. These eating disorder behaviours and experiences, in turn, reinforce the eating
disorder mindset. When clients are more than halfway through therapy, they may begin to notice that from time to time, their eating
disorder mindset is not dominating their every waking moment, as it did when they first started treatment. At this stage it is useful to
introduce the idea of the eating disorder mindset. The analogy of a DVD player may be used, in which the mind is likened to a DVD player and
mindsets (like over-evaluation of shape/weight/control) to DVDs. There are many other far less distressing and more useful mindsets, which
may replace the eating disorder mindset.
Controlling the eating disorder mindset involves identifying specific situations that trigger these mindsets; recognising the first signs
that the eating disorder mindset is being activated (the relapse signature); and displacing this mindset. Triggers may be identified by self-
monitoring and include a perceived change in weight or shape, critical comments from others, eating an avoided food, stress and negative
mood states. To displace mindset, clients should act rapidly to carry out a behaviour that counteracts the trigger. This usually involves doing
something already learned in treatment, such as sticking to a meal plan or not checking or avoiding or distracting oneself by engaging in
distracting interpersonal activities.
In earlier versions of Fairburn's CBT programme (e.g. Fairburn et al., 1993), mindsets were addressed with cognitive restructuring. The
first step in this process is for the client to write down the actual situation and the specific negative automatic thought that occurred in the
situation (not a summary or rephrasing of it). These thoughts may be identified in the final columns of self-monitoring sheets within and


outside treatment sessions. The following situations usually elicit relevant automatic thoughts: looking in a mirror, weighing themselves,
reacting to a comment about their appearance or appetite, being in situations where urges to binge or vomit occur, or seeing themselves in a
swimming costume or tight clothes. Here is an example of a situation and the negative automatic thought. 'I stepped on the scales on
Tuesday morning and was 8 stone 2 when I should have been 8 stone. I thought "I'm a tub of lard! I'm really fat!"' The second step in cognitive
restructuring is to accurately list the evidence that supports the thought. For example, 'My weight increased by 2 pounds over a period of 10
days.' The third step is to help clients list arguments or evidence that cast doubt on the validity of the negative automatic thought. Here
Socratic questioning may be used: 'How would you know if any person was fat? What clothes size do you have to have to be fat? Would you
judge someone in your class at school who was 8 stone 2 pounds to be fat? Are you applying one set of standards to yourself and another set
to other people? Have you gained 2 pounds because your body has accumulated more fat due to overeating or because you are retaining fluid
due to being in the premenstrual stage of your monthly cycle?' Clients may be taught to recognise the cognitive distortions listed earlier in
the section on CBT theories of eating disorders and invited to identify which of these are present in their negative automatic thoughts. The
fourth and final step of cognitive restructuring is to help the client reach a reasoned conclusion, which they may then use to guide their
behaviour as an alternative to the negative automatic thought. For example, 'I put on 2 pounds but my weight is within the normal range.' It
is not essential for clients to fully accept the validity of their reasoned conclusion. The point is that they become aware through repeatedly
challenging their negative automatic thoughts in therapy sessions and as homework that they have a limited number of such thoughts
which drive their dieting, bingeing and vomiting behaviour, and that these thoughts are not absolutely true. Also, the negative automatic
thoughts become less automatic and more conscious as clients become more practised at challenging them. As more examples of negative
automatic thoughts are addressed in therapy, certain extreme, rigid underlying assumptions, of which clients are usually not conscious, and
which they hold with great tenacity become clear. Examples include: 'If I am thin and light, then I will be loved by others, happy, successful
and worthwhile'; 'If I am fat and heavy, I will be abandoned by others, a failure, sad and worthless'; 'If I have self-control I am strong, good
and a success'; 'If I show any sign of lack of control, I am completely powerless, bad and a failure.' These underlying assumptions may

tentatively be suggested to clients and they may challenged using the four steps for cognitive restructuring outlined earlier. In addition,
clients may be invited to complete behavioural experiments, to disconfirm their beliefs that they will be ostracised if others see their bodies.
For example, clients may be invited to wear more close-fitting clothes, go to exercise classes where they wear leotards, or go swimming.
Clients often have a safety behaviour of wearing clothes that are nearer the size they want to be rather than the size they currently are, for
example, wearing a size 12 because it is nearer the size 10 they want to be, even though a size 14 would be a better fit now. Their rationale or
negative automatic thoughts may be that the sensation of tightness in their clothes warns them of the need to diet and lose weight, helping
them 'keep control'; they fear that if they wore a bigger size, there would be fewer bodily cues of fatness, they would exercise fewer weight
control measures, grow larger and thus be unhappier. Experiencing the discomfort of tight-fitting clothes throughout the day, particularly
after eating, fuels the pressure to diet, thus feeding into the negative cycle presented in Figure 22.1. As a behavioural experiment, clients may
be encouraged to give up this safety behaviour by wearing better-fitting, more comfortable clothes, which paradoxically reduces subjective
feelings of fatness and pressures to diet, helping them get out of the negative cycle of bingeing and purging.
Exploring the Origins of Overvaluation
In later sessions of therapy it is helpful to invite clients to identify events and experiences that sensitised them to over-evaluation of body
shape/weight/dieting. It is useful in this to distinguish between the period before the onset of the eating problem; a year before the onset
of the problem; the year following the onset of the problem; and the time since then. As clients are overcoming their eating disorder, this
exercise may help to distance them from their problem and view themselves as recovering.
Reducing Dieting
With eating disorders clients practise three types of dieting: (1) abstaining from eating for long periods of time, (2) avoiding specific
'forbidden' foods; and (3) restricting the amount of food eaten. Clients attempt to follow strict rules about when to eat, which forbidden
foods to avoid, and how much to eat. Following these rules leads to intense hunger. In stressful trigger situations, for people with bulimia


this hunger leads to bingeing, which is interpreted as evidence for poor self-control and low self-worth rather than unrealistic dietary
rules. A central strategy for resolving bulimia, therefore, is reducing or eliminating dieting. Many clients with eating disorders see dieting
as a good thing. Motivating them to stop dieting involves helping them to see its disadvantages. Extreme, rigid dietary restraint has many
disadvantages. Its causes preoccupation with food and eating. It makes eating distressing. It restricts social eating. It causes binge-eating. It
may lead to significant weight loss and anorexia, which has many health-related complications.
In stage 1, the prescription of a regular eating pattern of three meals and two snacks a day with intervals no longer than 3 hours addressed
one type of dieting, that is, avoiding eating for long time periods.
To address dietary rules about avoiding specific forbidden foods, first identify these rules and the reasons for them. Explore the client's
views of the consequences of breaking them. Collaboratively devise a plan with the client for breaking the rule, support them in doing so, and
explore consequences of this. Highlight the benefits to the client of this episode of dietary rule breaking and support the client to engage in
further dietary rule breaking.
To address rules about food avoidance, clients may be invited to visit a supermarket, identify and list all the 'forbidden' foods they can see,
and then classify these into four categories from the least to the most forbidden. Over the following weeks, the client is invited to plan and
eat meals or snacks in which these forbidden foods are incorporated into meals in small or normal amounts, starting with the least forbidden
and working gradually towards the most forbidden foods. These meals or snacks containing forbidden foods should only be planned for
low-stress periods when the client is likely to experience a high degree of self-control. This gradual and graded introduction of forbidden
foods into the client's diet should be continued until the client no longer feels anxious about eating them. After that, clients may return to a
narrower diet that may not often include them.
To address the third type of dieting - restrictive dieting - the client should be helped to move from a restricted diet to a diet containing
1,500 calories per day. Inspection of self-monitoring sheets will indicate current calorific intake and this information may be used to plan a
gradual increase in food consumption. Clients may also be invited to eat a more varied diet.


Stage 4. Relapse Prevention
Throughout stage 4, processes begun in stages 1 and 3 are continued. The main goals of the third stage, which involves three fortnightly
sessions in the 20-session programme or five three-weekly sessions in the 40-session programme, are maintenance and relapse prevention.
In-session weighing and self-monitoring are gradually phased out. Clients are helped to develop a short list of key elements to include in
their maintenance plans. These may include weekly weighing (if anorexia), practising social eating, not frequently checking or avoiding,
practising mood tolerance, and changing mindsets. A distinction should be made between a complete relapse (a rare event) and a minor lapse
or slip (which is a common event). For bulimic clients, bingeing as a response to stress, or for anorexic clients, fasting may be described as the
client's Achilles' heel. Clients' mastery of eating disorders is strengthened by coping well with slips, where they occasionally binge or fast in
response to stress. To equip them to cope with slips, clients may be invited to predict the sorts of situations that might trigger such slips, and
to develop plans for managing lapses when they occur. Such plans should include acknowledging that the temporary slip is not a permanent
relapse; that a slip is an opportunity for gaining strength rather than a sign of weakness; that planning regular daily eating patterns with
three meals, three snacks and no dieting is crucial for success; that problem-solving skills should be used to address complex social problems
that trigger urges to binge or to fast; and that eating disorder mindsets must be displaced. The client is given a homework assignment of
writing out a plan to manage lapses and this plan should be reviewed in the final session. At the end of stage 4, clients are offered a 20-week
follow-up appointment in which to review progress and consolidate long-term maintenance plans.
Addressing Underweight and Undereating
Clients who are underweight (below a BMI of 17.5) and undereating (eating less than 1,500 calories per day) typically meet the diagnostic
criteria for anorexia. They usually have limited motivation for increasing their food intake and weight because they do not see their eating
habits or weight as a problem. Typically they attend therapy at the request of parents or partners. For anorexic clients with BMIs in the 15.0-


17.5 range, an intensive programme of 40 weeks of outpatient CBT is usually required. The CBT programme as described so far is appropriate
for people with bulimia, and in this section its adaptation for anorexic clients is discussed.
In stage 1, there is a similar pattern of twice-weekly appointments with a similar agenda, except that there is a major focus on helping
clients develop motivation to change. This involves deepening the therapeutic alliance early by showing a strong interest in the client's
life (as well as their eating disorder), providing hope that recovery is possible, and assessing and providing information about the costs of
maintaining low weight and the benefits of regaining weight, and providing an individualised formulation.
In the first session it is important to enquire about all of the negative features of anorexia without labelling them as such, since patients
may conceal them if they know that they are due to their undereating and low weight. The physical features include dizziness (due to low
blood pressure), irregular menstruation (and loss of fertility), poor sleep, sensitivity to cold, dry skin, hair loss, and muscle weakness. The
psychological features are low mood, irritability, inflexibility, obsessionality and poor concentration. Social effects include loss of interest in
leisure activities, social withdrawal and loss of sexual drive. The eating disorders features include preoccupation with food, hoarding food,
preparing food with many condiments, ritualistic eating, eating slowly and feeling full after eating little, and over-exercising after eating.
The practice of in-session weighing in every session is established, and clients are asked to refrain from weighing themselves at home as this
is confusing. Clients are also invited to begin self-monitoring using the form in Table 22.3.
In the second session, self-monitoring homework and refraining from weighing at home is reviewed. Psychoeducation about the effects
of being underweight is provided. The physical, psychological, and social effects of low weight (listed earlier) are mentioned, and clients
are invited to note which ones apply to them. It is also mentioned that being underweight affects the heart (by making it weaker, causing
low blood pressure and arrhythmias), bones (by making them weaker and increasing risk of osteoporosis and fractures), muscles, and brain
(there is a loss of brain mass leading to concentration problems and inflexibility). Clients are invited to note which of these features are
present. They are also given the following critical information. Persistent low weight may do long-term damage to the heart and bones.
Almost all negative effects of low weight can be reversed by regaining a normal body weight. Some of the effects of low weight make

becoming motivated to recover very difficult. These include being preoccupied with food, feeling full after eating little, poor concentration,
inflexible thinking and having difficulty making decisions, and not wanting to socialise or do leisure activities. An individualised
formulation is drawn up, following the model in Figure 22.1. In the bottom right-hand box of the formulation beneath 'significantly low
weight', other relevant features of anorexia may be written; for example, preoccupation with eating, social withdrawal, obsessionality and
so forth. For homework clients continue self-monitoring and review their personalised formulation.
In the next couple of sessions the client's weight and BMI are graphed. Weight in pounds or kilograms is put on the y-axis and weeks
on the x-axis. Horizontal lines are drawn parallel to the x-axis at weights equivalent to BMIs of 20 and 25 which represent normal body
weight. A sloping line is drawn from the current week on the x-axis upwards at a diagonal angle representing gaining a pound a week. For
the remainder of treatment, twice-weekly or weekly weights are plotted on this graph. The diagonal line represents desired rate of weight
gain. A target BMI of 'around 20' (between 19.0 and 19.9) is set as a therapeutic goal, since at this weight the majority of patients no
longer experience the adverse effects of being underweight. There is not a consensus in the field on this target BMI. However, it is the BMI
recommended by Fairburn (2008) based on extensive clinical and research experience.
For psychoeducation clients may be invited to read Lucas's (2008) Demystifying Anorexia Nervosa. Because some patients recovering from
anorexia have binges, they are also invited to read Fairburn's (2013) Overcoming Binge Eating.
By session 4 clients are invited to introduce a regular pattern of eating, with breakfast, lunch and an evening meal, and midmorning,
afternoon and evening snacks. The (low) amount of food that clients normally eat is spread across these regular meal and snack times. This
addresses the problem of clients delaying meals. After motivational work, clients then gradually increase the amount of food eaten at these
regular times.
The goal of motivational work is to help clients arrive at a personal decision to regain weight. The client is invited to examine the pros and
cons, as they see them now, of regaining weight so that they have a BMI of 19.0-19.9. They are then asked to list their valued life goals (e.g.
getting married, having children), and are informed that if they do not regularise their eating now, research shows that their anorexia will


persist or develop into binge eating or bulimia within 5 years. In light of this information they are then invited to list the pros and cons that
would be present in 5 years' time if they regained weight now. The implications of these pros and cons exercises are discussed, and clients are
invited to decide whether or not they wish to make a 'fresh start' and regain weight.
At this point a stage, which is a month (or seven sessions) after the start of treatment, a 3-week review is conducted. It is useful to conduct
monthly reviews throughout treatment as progress may stall from time to time, and identifying obstacles to change during reviews may
address this stalling process.
When clients have decided to regain weight, they may be advised that there are two phases: weight regain (achieving a target BMI of about
20) and weight maintenance (maintaining their BMI at about 20, or between 19.0 and 19.9). To regain weight at the rate of 0.5 kg per week
(or 1 lb. per week) which is optimal for outpatient treatment, clients need to consume an additional 500 calories per day. There may be an
initial rapid increase in weight due to rehydration (if clients were dehydrated). However, after this regaining weight is a slow process. Clients
may be invited to plan ways to increase their daily intake by 500 calories either alone or with the help of a dietician. It will involve them
eating larger portions and including more energy-rich food and drinks in their meals. If they wish, clients may use energy-rich drinks during
the weight-gain process.
It is difficult to maintain motivation for change because the benefits of recovery do not become apparent until a BMI of about 20 is
reached. Therefore, maintaining motivation is an ongoing theme over the course of treatment. The benefits of recovery and downsides of
self-starvation should be regularly revisited, by reviewing conclusions from the pros and cons exercise described earlier. Where clients feel
disinclined to eat appropriate amounts at their three meals and three snacks a day, they may write down their concerns, and then counter
these by referring to their conclusions from the pros and cons exercise. Therapists need to balance being empathic and supportive with
maintaining pressure to change, by taking a 'friendly but firm' approach.


Once a target BMI of about 20 has been obtained, the weight maintenance process is initiated. If clients are using high-energy drinks
these may be phased out. By a process of trial and error, the number of calories in meals and snacks associated with weight maintenance is
established. The final part of treatment with anorexic clients follows the same format as that outlined in the section on stage 4.
Extra Stage 2 Modules for Intensive CBT
Perfectionism
Clinical perfectionism is a condition marked by an extreme over-evaluation of self-worth based on achievement in one area of life (e.g. work,
housekeeping, sport or music); marginalisation of other areas of life; extreme fear of failure in the valued area; regularly resetting
increasingly higher standards or goals; discounting successes; repeated performance checking; and avoiding critical performance tests
because of fear of failure (e.g. delaying submitting key work assignments). To highlight the effects of perfectionism on their lives and open
up possibilities for change, clients may be invited to draw a pie chart with each slice representing an area of activity within their lives that
affects their self-evaluation (e.g. family life, work, shape/weight/eating, recreation). The size of each slice should reflect the extent to which
the area is important in the client's self-evaluation. For perfectionistic clients with eating disorders, the pie-slice representing the life area
about which they are perfectionistic (e.g. work) and the pie-slice representing shape/weight/eating are both usually very large, and other
areas (e.g. family life, recreation) are usually comparatively small. Clients may then be invited to consider if both of these large slices in fact
overlap, thus reflecting a single very large slice in which they demand very high levels of achievement from themselves, in order to view
themselves as valuable. This process of overvaluation of achievement sets up vicious cycles that maintain the perfectionism (and eating
problems). Very high standards, preoccupation with performance, frequent performance checking (often by looking at the work of others),
avoiding key performance tests and marginalisation of other areas of life all reinforce beliefs about self-worth depending on high
achievement. Then the client is invited to reflect on the disadvantages of having exceptionally high achievement in limited areas of their

lives (work and shape/weight/eating) dominate their self-evaluation. To reduce marginalisation of other areas of life, clients may be invited
to expand their range of pleasurable spontaneous activities. The negative effects on work efficiency of excessive goal-directed activity may
be explored, and tested with behavioural experiments where goal-directed activity is reduced, and the effect of this on efficiency is
monitored. To address high-frequency performance checking and avoidance of key tests of performance, regular reasonable performance
tests may be introduced (similar to the way weekly in-session weighing replaces very frequent self-weighing in stage 1 of the programme).
It is also helpful to invite clients to recount in vivid detail episodes in their early family lives that underpin their perfectionism. For
addressing perfectionism a useful self-help resource is Antony and Swinson (2009).
Core Low Self-Esteem
Core low self-esteem is marked by an entrenched, chronic, unconditional negative view of self-worth (which precedes the development of
eating disorders and clinical depression); hopelessness concerning the possibility of overcoming their eating disorder; and extreme negative
cognitive biases. It is important to help clients understand the role of low self-esteem in maintaining their eating disorder. Low self-esteem
motivates them to evaluate their body shape negatively and strive to perform well in areas that they overvalue, particularly the area of
controlling their eating, weight and body shape. Their negative cognitive distortions (listed in Table 22.6) lead them to perceive themselves
as repeatedly failing in specific attempts to control their eating, weight and body shape, and then to generalise this to their whole identity.
That is, they interpret their perceived failure to control their eating and body shape as confirmation that they are a failure. This reinforces
their core low self-esteem. Negative cognitive distortions listed in Table 22.6 may be addressed by helping clients identify the one that they
are using, and then collecting evidence that is inconsistent with their cognitive distortions to help them develop a more balanced view
of themselves, as outlined in Chapters 3 and 9. For example, if clients discount positives, they may be invited to describe in detail their
successes, achievements and strengths, and use self-monitoring to find these in their daily lives. It is also helpful to invite clients to recount

in vivid detail episodes in their early family lives that underpin their low self-esteem. For addressing low self-esteem a useful resource is
Fennell's (2009). Overcoming Low Self-Esteem.
Interpersonal Therapy for Bulimia
IPT based on the work of Harry Stack Sullivan (1953) and originally developed as a treatment for depression has been shown to be an
effective treatment for bulimia and anorexia (Hay, 2013; Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 2010; Watson & Bulik, 2013; Weissman et al., 2000, chap. 21).
In IPT it is assumed that eating disorders are multifactorially determined, but that the four categories of interpersonal difficulties listed in
Table 22.7 play a central role in precipitating the onset of the disorder and maintaining bulimic symptoms. IPT aims to help clients resolve
interpersonal problems that maintain their eating disorders. IPT has a slower impact than CBT on bulimic symptoms, but is as effective in
the long term. This is not surprising, because CBT directly targets eating behaviour and related cognitions early in treatment. In contrast,
IPT targets relationship difficulties that are more complex and slower to change, and only when these begin to change do changes in eating
patterns occur.
IPT for bulimia involves 20 sessions conducted over a period of 4-5 months. IPT has three stages. In the first stage, which spans four
sessions, the client is engaged in treatment, current interpersonal problems are identified and a treatment contract is established.
In the middle stage, which spans about a dozen sessions, the core interpersonal problem that maintains the eating disorders is addressed.
In the final stage, which spans about four sessions, gains made are consolidated and clients are helped to prepare to continue the work after
termination of therapy.
Stage 1. Diagnosis, Formulation and Contracting
In the first stage an assessment is conducted over four sessions, and the client is given a diagnosis and assigned to the sick-role. This
role defines the client as needing help, exempts them from social pressures, and elicits their cooperation in the recovery process. Many


clients with eating disorders adopt excessive caretaking responsibilities with a self-sacrificing disregard for their own welfare to obtain the
approval of others. The sick-role provides a legitimate way to curtail this. Clients may be advised to focus their energy on recovery rather
than on meeting the needs of others. To generate hope, clients may be informed that eating disorders are known syndromes defined by
DSM-5 or ICD-10 criteria (listed in Tables 22.1 and 22.2) and that respond well to psychotherapy. Clients are informed that the binge-purge
cycle of bulimia or the self-starvation of anorexia and related beliefs and attitudes are typically maintained by interpersonal factors, and
identifying and modifying these leads to resolution of the disorder. The therapist then conducts a review of the client's past and current
social functioning and intimate relationships. For each significant person in the client's social network, an interpersonal inventory is taken.
Information is obtained on frequency and duration of contact, regular activities that occur within these relationships, satisfactory and
unsatisfactory aspects of these relationships, and aspects of the relationships that they would like to change. In addition, the therapist takes
a history of significant life events, transitions, changes and stresses and related fluctuations in mood, self-esteem, relationships and bulimic
symptoms. The therapist then links the onset and maintenance of the eating disorder to one (or in some cases two) of the four key areas in
Table 22.7 (grief, role disputes, role transitions and interpersonal deficits). This interpersonal formulation provides a basis for setting goals,
which involve resolving specific interpersonal difficulties, and establishing a treatment contract to work towards these goals.
Stage 2. Resolving Interpersonal Difficulties
In the intermediate stage, specific strategies may be used to help clients achieve the goals from their interpersonal formulation of eating
disorder. Progress towards interpersonal goals is reviewed at each session, but not changes in eating disorder symptoms, weight or shape.
The therapeutic positioning in IPT is one of warmth, empathy and respect. Therapeutic conversations focus on specific incidents relevant
to achieving interpersonal goals rather than on generalities. In enquiring about specific incidents, therapists facilitate the expression of
affect, particularly affects that are avoided or unacknowledged. A central principle for practising IPT with eating disordered clients is to
minimise and avoid discussion of eating disorder symptoms. If clients bring these up, they are acknowledged but the therapist redirects the

conversation to the key unresolved interpersonal issue and related goals that are the focus of treatment. Little time is spent discussing eating
habits, vomiting, weighing or body shape. Specific strategies are used to address goals in each of the four key areas listed in Table 22.7.
Grief
Where grief due to complicated bereavement following the death of a loved one is a central factor maintaining depression, the aim of IPT
is to facilitate mourning and help the client find relationships and activities to compensate for the loss. To achieve this aim the following
strategies may be used. Link the course of the relationship with the deceased, their death and the aftermath of this on the one hand and the
course of the eating disorder symptoms on the other. Concurrently facilitate the exploration and re-experiencing of feelings associated with
the deceased over the course of the relationship. When progress has been made with this grief work, shift the focus onto the future and then
explore possible ways of becoming more involved with others. Pace this transition to match the degree to which the client has resolved their
feelings of grief and is ready to look to the future.
Role Disputes
Marital disharmony or difficulties involving other family members, friends or colleagues are among the more significant role disputes
associated with bulimia. Where role disputes are a central factor maintaining bulimia, the aim of IPT is to help the client clearly identify
the dispute and develop and implement a plan for resolving it. To achieve this aim the following strategies may be used. Link the current
dispute to eating disorder symptoms. The dispute may be overt (e.g. domestic violence) or covert (e.g. an uneasy feeling about the unspoken
possibility of infidelity). Explore the onset and course of the current dispute and determine the current developmental stage of the dispute.
If the client believes the dispute is irresolvable, facilitate withdrawal from this relationship and mourning of this loss. If the dispute
has reached an impasse, increase disharmony in order to create movement towards the stage of renegotiation. If it is at the stage where
renegotiation is the aim, then facilitate this process by helping partners calmly communicate about it. In facilitating renegotiation, help
clients specify the core issue in the dispute, and their different expectations and values about this issue. In exploring the present dispute,

facilitate framing it in as solvable a way as possible. Then brainstorm multiple options for resolving it. Look at the pros and cons of each.
Explore the resources available for resolving the dispute or changing the relationship. Explore the barriers to resolving the conflict by trying
to help the client answer these questions: In this and other relationships, is the client showing a similar pattern or style of conflict? What
assumptions underlie the client's position in this and other similar disputes? What is being gained by not resolving the dispute, or what will
be lost if it is resolved? Help the client select the best option for resolving the dispute and then plan in detail how to implement and review
the impact of this plan.
Role Transitions
Starting or ending relationships within the family or work context, moving jobs or houses, graduation, promotion, retirement or diagnosis
of an illness are some of the role transitions associated with bulimia. Where role transitions are a central factor maintaining bulimia, IPT
aims to help the client mourn the loss of the old role, appreciate the benefits of the new one and develop a sense of mastery of the demands
of the new role. To achieve this aim, the following strategies may be adopted. Relate the eating disorder symptoms to a recent role change.
Review the positive and negative aspects of the new and old roles. Explore and ventilate feelings about the loss of the old role and the process
of change from one role to another. Facilitate the development of social supports and new skills to help the client manage the demands of the
new role.
Social Skills Deficits
Where eating disorders are maintained by difficulty making and maintaining significant relationships, the aim of IPT is to help clients
reduce social isolation and form new relationships. To achieve this aim the following strategies may be used. Relate the eating disorder
symptoms to social isolation. Review positive and negative aspects of past relationships, noting in particular repetitive self-defeating
patterns that lead to isolation. Discuss client's positive and negative feelings about the therapist and clarify parallels between the therapeutic

relationship and other current relationships in the client's life. The psychodynamic therapy techniques described in Chapter 4 for drawing
parallels between the therapeutic relationship and relationships with other significant people may be used here.
Stage 3. Disengagement
In the last four sessions the therapist asks clients to describe how they have achieved their therapeutic goals. The therapist helps clients
develop a detailed understanding of how they have achieved the improvements they have shown and explores ways of consolidating these
gains. The therapist also helps clients develop strategies for maintaining improvements in the identified interpersonal problem areas,
preventing relapse if dietary restriction recurs, and identifying further work that needs to be pursued independently by the client when
therapy has finished. The client's feelings about termination of the therapeutic relationship are also explored in the final stage of IPT.
A more detailed account to specific IPT therapy strategies and skills is given in Chapter 9 in the section on IPT for depression.
Systemic Interventions
Psychoeducational interventions for caregivers of people with eating disorders can reduce carer distress and behaviours which maintain
eating disorders, such as enabling and expressed emotion (Anastasiadou et al., 2014; Hibbs et al., 2015). It is therefore useful to offer a family
support group service for parents and partners of clients with eating disorders and disseminating family support materials such as Skills-
Based Learning for Caring for a Loved One With an Eating Disorder: The New Maudsley Method (Treasure et al., 2007). Family members may also
benefit from membership of self-help carer support groups.
Biomedical Practices and Eating Disorders
The two evidence-based biomedical practices routinely used in the treatment of eating disorders are inpatient re-feeding and weight
restoration programmes for anorexic clients and antidepressant medication for clients with bulimia (Wilson & Fairburn, 2007)

Inpatient Re-Feeding and Weight Restoration Programmes
The treatment of clients with anorexia should begin with inpatient care to address physical complications of starvation in severe cases with
high medical risk. This should be followed up with outpatient psychotherapy. In lower-risk cases, treatment may begin with outpatient
therapy. Following a thorough medical examination a decision on inpatient treatment may be made. Where any of the following features are
present, inpatient treatment is indicated (American Psychiatric Association, 2006; NICE, 2004; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2002, 2010;
Winston & Webster, 2003):
• A BMI of 15 or less or a rapid fall in weight of more than 20% in 6 months;
• Bradycardia (less than 40 beats per minute);
• Hypotension (blood pressure less than 90/60 mmHg if over 16 years or 80/50 mmHg if under 16 years);
• Orthostatic drop greater than 10-20 mmHg;
• Severe dehydration;
• Hypoglycaemia;
• Poor diabetic control;
Severe electrolyte imbalance (e.g. K+ less than 2.5 mmol/L; Na+ less than 130 mmol/L);
• Petechial rash and significant platelet suppression;
• Organ compromise - hepatic, renal, bone marrow;
• Uncontrolled vomiting;
Gastrointestinal bleeding;
• Self-injurious or suicidal behaviour;

• Severe depression or OCD;
• Low motivation for treatment and lack of insight;
• Lack of response to outpatient treatment;
• Intolerable family situation (highly critical, abusive or collusive family);
• Unsupportive social situation (social isolation).
Historically highly restrictive, authoritarian behavioural weight restoration was a common practice, but there is now good evidence that
relatively lenient collaborative programmes can be as effective in helping clients gain weight (Palmer, 2000; Winston & Webster, 2003).
Typically a plan for hospital admission and weight restoration is agreed between the client; a member of the client's family; the psychologist
or other professional conducting outpatient therapy; the psychiatrist or other physician responsible for the inpatient unit; and a key worker,
often a nurse, who will be responsible for implementing the re-feeding programme. A target plateau BMI of about 20 is agreed as the overall
weight restoration goal. Intermediate weight-gain goals of 0.5-1.0 kg per week are set. A balanced diet and gradually increasing daily
caloric intake is agreed. Clients who are severely emaciated may need to begin with a calorie count as low as 1,500 calories a day in order
to reduce the chances for stomach pain and bloating, fluid retention, and heart failure. Gradually, daily calorific intake is increased to as
many as 3,500 calories a day. Small frequent meals are preferable to large infrequent meals because of delayed gastric emptying associated
with anorexia. Dietary supplements may be required. Zinc supplementation has been shown to help increase body mass, and in some units
calcium, multivitamins and oral phosphates are routinely given. Nasogastric tube or intravenous feeding is rarely required unless the client's
condition is life-threatening. Overzealous administration of glucose solutions can trigger re-feeding syndrome, where phosphate levels
drop severely and causes hypophosphatemia. Symptoms include irritability, muscle weakness, bleeding from the mouth, disturbed heart
rhythms, seizures and coma. During inpatient re-feeding programmes, initially clients are confined to bed, usually in a private room, and
their mealtimes and toilet visits are strictly supervised by the key worker. However, in lenient programmes there is no restriction on visitors


or on access to books or TV. As weight restoration progresses, clients are permitted to take some gentle exercise each day and to leave their
room for increasingly longer periods; supervision of mealtimes and toilet visits is relaxed. During mealtime, discussion of eating disorders
is usually avoided.
Daily or thrice weekly weighing routines may be established on the ward. Key workers without specialist training may require
considerable support in dealing with clients with eating disorders. Helping them to avoid the pitfalls of being either too punitive or too
protective is essential, since such attitudes may simply replicate family responses to the condition and further maintain the client's eating
problems. Staff need to be briefed on weight targets, mealtime routines and specific limits that must be kept. For mealtime routines, at the
outset, the client may be given a set time period, such as an hour, within which to consume a meal, otherwise finishing the meal may be
supervised by a nurse. In supervising eating, staff sit with clients and sympathetically but firmly insist that they eat. The overriding position
taken by staff is one of supporting the client in her fight against the disorder.
Antidepressant Medication for Bulimia
There is good evidence that antidepressants, both TCAs and SSRIs, can lead to short-term reductions in bulimic symptoms for most clients,
but total remission occurs in under a third of cases (Hay & Claudino, 2012). In contrast, remission occurs in about 50% of bulimic clients
treated with CBT or IPT. Fluoxetine, the most studied antidepressant for bulimic clients, is effective in a daily dose of 60 mg. This is three
times the advised dose for depression, suggesting that the mode of action may be different in bulimia. Results of randomised controlled
trials with a variety of medications do not support the use of psychopharmacological interventions for anorexia nervosa (Wilson & Fairburn,
2007).
Other Biomedical Issues
Eating disorders involve multiple medical risks, not all of which are associated with chronic high-risk cases (NICE, 2004). In primary care,


subthreshold cases of anorexia with diabetes or pregnant clients require careful monitoring and intervention.
Service Organisation
Guidelines on service provision for people with eating disorders have been developed by various professional groups. (American Psychiatric
Association, 2006; Bell et al., 2001; NICE, 2004; Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2002, 2010). These guidelines contain proposal for service
development and organisation. Early screening and intervention for older adolescent and young women with eating disorders in primary
care may prevent the later development of chronic eating disorders and so is strongly advised. There is a consensus that a stepped-care
approach to treatment is appropriate for eating disorders with circumscribed initial intervention being offered first, and only if this is
unsuccessful is more intensive intervention provided. Subthreshold cases of eating disorders may benefit from self-help bibliotherapy or
computer-based programmes using the self-help materials listed at the end of the chapter coupled with minimal supportive counselling or
participation in a self-help group, of which there are many. Clients who do not respond to this approach may benefit from locally provided
specialist outpatient psychological intervention of the type described in this chapter. The effective provision of specialist psychological
therapy involves therapists receiving regular case supervision. Where cases do not respond to psychological therapy antidepressant
treatment for bulimia is appropriate, but antidepressant treatment is not effective with anorexia. High-risk cases with multiple medical
complications require hospitalisation and a weight restoration re-feeding programme such as that described earlier. Optimally this is
provided at a regional specialist unit staffed by a multidisciplinary team. Chronic complex cases may require long-term outpatient care and
attendance at a local day hospital. Services should be organised according to a hub and spoke model, with a regional 'hub' specialist centre
with inpatient facilities of at least six beds and a full multidisciplinary team for a population of 1 million, with a 'spoke' specialist outpatient
eating disorder service for every locality of 30,000 people (Richards, 2003).


Summary
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia are the two main eating disorders seen in clinical practice, with the former being characterised primarily by
weight loss and the latter by a cyclical pattern of bingeing and purging. Both eating disorders are more common among female adolescents
and young women. About 1-2% of the adolescent and young adult female population suffer from eating disorders. In clinical populations,
comorbid mood disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorders are common in cases of anorexia, and for bulimia comorbid drug misuse
and borderline personality disorder are relatively common. For anorexia nervosa about half of all cases have a good outcome, a third have
moderate outcome and a fifth have a poor outcome. For bulimia nervosa about half of all cases have a good outcome, a quarter have
a moderate outcome and the remaining quarter have a poor outcome. A variety of genetic, temperamental, sociocultural, personality,
biomedical, cognitive-behavioural, interpersonal and psychodynamic factors contribute to the development and maintenance of eating
disorders. Because of their ambivalence about resolving their eating problems, motivational interviewing is a useful intervention to help
clients with eating disorders engage in assessment and treatment. Assessment should be carried out by a multidisciplinary team and cover
current and past physical, nutritional and psychological states.
On the basis of the assessment a preliminary formulation may be drawn up. This should link predisposing, precipitating and maintaining
factors to the abnormal eating pattern and specify protective factors that may be drawn on during treatment. Evidence-based intervention
for bulimia includes either manualised CBT or IPT conducted over about 20 sessions. For anorexia 40 sessions are required. CBT aims to
disrupt behavioural patterns and modify the belief systems or mindsets (over-evaluation of shape/weight/eating control) that underpin
repetitive eating disorder behaviour. IPT aims to help clients resolve interpersonal difficulties that maintain their eating disorder.
Antidepressants, notably fluoxetine, are effective with a proportion of bulimic clients and may be used where psychotherapy has been
ineffective or is unavailable. In contrast to the good evidence base for the treatment of bulimia, the evidence base for the psychotherapeutic

treatment of anorexia is sparse. In high-risk cases of anorexia, inpatient weight restoration is essential, followed by formulation-driven CBT,
IPT or CAT.

Exercise

1. Divide into groups of three and assign roles of Linda, the psychologist and an observer. Role-play with Linda the following parts of
sessions, rotating roles after each role-play. The observer's role is to listen attentively and after the role-play to give feedback to the
psychologist on three specific and behavioural aspects of what s/he did well and at most two suggestions of things to do differently.
a. Session 5, where Linda and the psychologist collaboratively develop an individualised formulation with Linda.
b. Session 7, where Linda and the psychologist discuss the CBT formulation (see Figure 22.1) and work towards setting some goals for
regularising eating habits.
c. Session 13, where Linda and the psychologist look at evidence for and against Linda's belief that if others knew her better, they
would laugh at her.
2. In either a diagram or a paragraph, formulate Linda's difficulties with three models, CBT, interpersonal therapy and systemic. In small
groups, discuss the merits of each formulation and treatment approach.

Further reading for Practitioners
Agras, W. (2010). The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fairburn, C. (2008). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy and Eating Disorders. London: Guilford.


Further reading for Clients and Carers
Antony, M., & Swinson, R. (2009). When Perfect isn't Good Enough (Second Edition). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Cooper, M., Todd, G., & Wells, A. (2000). Bulimia Nervosa. A Cognitive Therapy Programme for Clients. London: Jessica Kingsley.
Cooper, P. J. (2009). Overcoming Bulimia Nervosa: A Self-Help Guide Using Cognitive Behavioural Techniques (Revised Edition). London:
Robinson Publishing.
Fairburn, C. (2013). Overcoming Binge Eating (Second Edition). London UK: Guilford.
Fennell, M. (2009). Overcoming Low Self-Esteem (Second Edition). London: Constable & Robinson.
Freeman, C. (2009). Overcoming Anorexia Nervosa. London: Constable & Robinson.
Lucas, A. (2008). Demystifying Anorexia Nervosa (Revised Edition). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Schmidt, U., & Treasure, J. (1993). Getting Better Bit(e) by Bit(e). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Treasure, J. (1997). Anorexia Nervosa. A Survival Guide for Families Friends and Sufferers. Hove: Psychology Press.
Treasure, J., & Alexander, J. (2013). Anorexia Nervosa: A Recovery Guide for Sufferers, Families and Friends (Second Edition). London:
Routledge.
Treasure, J., & Schmidt, U. (1993). Getting Better Bit(e) By Bit(e): A Survival Kit for Sufferers of Bulimia Nervosa and Binge Eating Disorders.
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Treasure, J., Smith, G., & Crane, A. (2007). Skills-Based Learning for Caring for A Loved One with An Eating Disorder: The New Maudsley
Method. London: Routledge.
Waller, G., Moutford, V., Lawson, R., Gray, E., Cordery, H., & Hinrishsen, H. (2010). Beating Your Eating Disorder: A Cognitive-Behavioural
Self-Help Guide for Adult Sufferers and Their Carers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Assessment Instruments
Bohn, K., & Fairburn, C. (2008). Clinical Impairment Assessment Questionnaire (CIA 3.0). In C. Fairburn (Ed.), Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy and Eating Disorders (pp. 315-317). London: Guilford.
Cooper, P. J., Taylor, M., Cooper, Z., & Fairburn, C. (1987). The development and validation of the Body Shape Questionnaire. International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 6, 485-494.
Fairburn, C., & Beglin, S. (2008). The Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q 6.0). In C. Fairburn (Ed.), Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy and Eating Disorders (pp. 309-313). London: Guilford.
Fairburn, C., Cooper, Z., & O'Connor, E. (2008). The Eating Disorder Examination (Edition 16.0D). In C. Fairburn (Ed.), Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy and Eating Disorders (pp. 265-308). London: Guilford.
Fichter, M., Elton, M., Engel, K., et al. (1990). The structured interview for anorexia and bulimia nervosa (SIAB): development and
characteristics of a (semi-) standardized instrument. In M. Fichter (Ed.), Bulimia nervosa: Basic Research Diagnosis and Therapy (pp. 57-
70). Chichester: Wiley.
Garner, D. (2005). Eating Disorder Inventory-3. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Garner, D., Olmsted, M., Bohr, Y., & Garfinkle, P. (1982). The Eating Attitudes Test, psychometric features and clinical correlates.
Psychological Medicine, 12, 871-878.
Henderson, M., & Freeman, C. (1987). A self-rating scale for bulimia: the "BITE". British Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 18-24.
Mintz, L., O'Halloran, M., Mulholland, A., & Schneider, P. (1997). Questionnaire for eating disorder diagnoses. Reliability and validity of
operationalising DSM-IV criteria into a self-report format. Journal of Counselling Psychology, 44, 63-71.


Morgan, A., & Hayward, A. (1988). Clinical assessment of anorexia nervosa: The Morgan-Russell outcome assessment schedule. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 367-371.
Morgan, J. Reid, F., & Lacey, J. (2000). The SCOFF questionnaire: A new screening tool for eating disorders. Western Journal of Medicine,
172, 164-165.
Plamer, R., Christie, M., Cordle, C., Davies, D., & Kerrick, J. (1987). The Clinical Eating Disorder Rating Instrument (CEDRI): A preliminary
description. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 6, 9-16.
Slade, P., & Dewey, M. (1986). Development and preliminary validation of SCANS: A screening instrument for identifying individuals at
risk of developing anorexia and bulimia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 5, 517-538.
Slade, P., Dewey, M., Kiemle, G., & Newton, T. (1990). Update on SCANS: A screening instrument for identifying individuals at risk of
developing an eating disorder. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 9, 583-584.
Slade, P., Dewey, M., Newton, T., Brodie, D., & Kiemle, G. (1990). Development and preliminary validation of the body satisfaction scale
(BSS). Psychology and Health, 4, 213-220.
Stunkard, A., & Messick, S. (1985). The Three Factor Eating Questionnaire. To measure dietary restraint, disinhibition and hunger.
Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 29, 71-83. (Eating Inventory is available from San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.)
Thelen, M., Farmer, J., Wonderlich, S., & Smith, M. (1991). A revision of the bulimia test: The BULIT-R. Psychological Assessment, 3, 119-
124.
Williams, G., & Power, K. (1996). Stirling Eating Disorder Scales. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Williams, G., Power, K., Miller, H., Freeman, C., Yellowlees, A., Dowds, T., ... Parry-Jones, W. (1994). Development and validation of the
Stirling Eating Disorder Scales. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 16, 35-43.


Websites
Academy for Eating Disorders: http://www.aedweb.org/
Eating Disorders Association: http://gurney.co.uk/eda
Eating Disorders Resources: http://edr.org.uk/
Eating Disorders Treatment: http://eating-disorder.com
NICE National Institute for Clinical Excellence guidelines for treating eating disorders: http://guidance.nice.org.uk/Topic/
Mental HealthBehavioural
References
Aardoom, J. J., Dingemans, A. E., Spinhoven, P., & Van Furth, E. F. (2013). Treating eating disorders over the internet: A systematic review
and future research directions. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 46(6), 539-552.
Agras, W. (2010). The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders. New York: Oxford University Press.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2006). Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with Eating Disorders (Third Edition).
Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Anastasiadou, D., Medina-Pradas, C., Sepulveda, A. R., & Treasure, J. (2014). A systematic review of family caregiving in eating disorders.
Eating Behaviours, 15(3), 464-477.

Anderson, D., & Murray, A. (2010). Psychological assessment of eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating
Disorders (pp. 249-258). New York: Oxford University Press.
Antony, M., & Swinson, R. (2009). When Perfect Isn't Good Enough (Second Edition). Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales, J., & Nielsen, S. (2011). Mortality rates in patients with anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders: A
meta-analysis of 36 studies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 724-731.
Bankoff, S. M., Karpel, M. G., Forbes, H. E., & Pantalone, D. W. (2012). A systematic review of dialectical behaviour therapy for the
treatment of eating disorders. Eating Disorders: The Journal of Treatment & Prevention, 20(3), 196-215.
Beintner, I., Jacobi, C., & Schmidt, U. H. (2014). Participation and outcome in manualized self-help for bulimia nervosa and binge eating
disorder-A systematic review and metaregression analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 34(2), 158-176.
Bell, L., Clare, L., & Thorn. (2001). Service Guidelines for People with Eating Disorders. Division of Clinical Psychology Occasional Paper No 3.
Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society.
Bruch, H. (1973). Eating Disorders. New York: Basic Books.
Bruch, H. (1978). The Golden Cage. The Enigma of Anorexia Nervosa. Cambridge, MA; Harvard University Press.
Cassin, S., & von Ranson, K. M. (2005). Personality and eating disorders: a decade in review. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 895-916.
Clausen, L., Lübeck, M., & Jones, A. (2013). Motivation to change in the eating disorders: A systematic review. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 46(8), 755-763.
Collier, D., & Treasure, J. (2004). The aetiology of eating disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 185, 363-365.
Currin, L., Schmidt, U., Treasure, J., & Jick, H. (2005). Time trends in eating disorder incidence. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 132-
135.
Dancyger, I., Krakower, S., & Fornari, V. (2013). Eating disorders in adolescents: Review of treatment studies that include
psychodynamically informed therapy. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 22, 97-117.


DeJong, H., Broadbent, H., & Schmidt, U. (2012). A systematic review of dropout from treatment in outpatients with anorexia nervosa.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 45(5), 635-647.
Dodge, E. (2012). Family evolution and process during the child and adolescent years in eating disorders. In J. Lock (2012). The Oxford
Handbook of Child and Adolescent Eating Disorders. Developmental Perspectives (pp. 149-162). New York: Oxford University Press.
Dölemeyer, R., Tietjen, A., Kersting, A., & Wagner, B. (2013). Internet-based interventions for eating disorders in adults: A systematic
review. BMC Psychiatry, 13. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com/docview/1431014581?accountid=14507
Downs, K. J., & Blow, A. J. (2013). A substantive and methodological review of family-based treatment for eating disorders: The last 25
years of research. Journal of Family Therapy, 35, 3-28.
Fairburn, C. (2008). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy and Eating Disorders. London: Guilford.
Fairburn, C. (2013). Overcoming binge eating (Second Edition). London: Guilford.
Fairburn, C. G., Marcus, M. D., & Wilson, G. T. (1993). Cognitive behaviour therapy for binge eating and bulimia nervosa: A
comprehensive treatment manual. In C. G. Fairburn & G. T. Wilson (Eds.), Binge Eating: Nature, Assessment, and Treatment (pp. 361-404).
New York: Guilford Press.
Fennell, M. (2009). Overcoming Low Self-Esteem (Second Edition). London: Constable & Robinson.
Franko, D. L., & Keel, P. K. (2006). Suicidality in eating disorders: Occurrence, correlates, and clinical implications. Clinical Psychology
Review, 26, 769-782.
Frichter, M., & Pirke, K. (1995). Starvation models and eating disorders. In G. Szmukler, C. Dare & J. Treasure (Eds.), Handbook of Eating
Disorders (pp. 83-108). Chichester: Wiley.
Galsworthy-Francis, L., & Allan, S. (2014). Cognitive behavioural therapy for anorexia nervosa: A systematic review. Clinical Psychology
Review, 34(1), 54-72.
Garner, D. (2005). Eating Disorder Inventory-3. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.


Gowers, S. (2013). Outcome. In B. Lask & R. Bryant Waugh (Eds.), Eating Disorders in Childhood and Adolescence (Fourth Edition, pp. 148-
170). Hove, UK: Routledge.
Gull, W. (1874). Anorexia nervosa (apesia hysterica, anorexia hysterica). Transactions of the Clinical Society of London, 7, 22-28.
Hay, P. (2013). A systematic review of evidence for psychological treatments in eating disorders: 2005-2012. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 46, 462-469.
Hay, P. J., & Claudino, A. M. (2012). Clinical psychopharmacology of eating disorders: A research update. International Journal of
Neuropsychopharmacology, 15(2), 209-222.
Hibbs, R., Rhind, C., Leppanen, J., & Treasure, J. (2015). Interventions for caregivers of someone with an eating disorder: A meta-analysis.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48(4), 349-361.
Hoek, H. (2006). Incidence, prevalence and mortality of anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 19,
389-394.
Holtom-Viesel, A., & Allan, S. (2014). A systematic review of the literature on family functioning across all eating disorder diagnoses in
comparison to control families. Clinical Psychology Review, 34, 29-43.
Jacobi, C., & Fittig, E. (2010). Psychosocial risk factors for eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders
(pp. 123-136). New York: Oxford University Press.
Jacobi, C., Hayward, C., de Zwaan, M., Kraemer, H., & Agras, W. (2004). Coming to terms with risk factors for eating disorders: application
of risk terminology and suggestions for a general taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 19–65.
Kanakam, N., & Treasure, J. (2013). A review of cognitive neuropsychiatry in the taxonomy of eating disorders: State, trait, or genetic?
Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 18(1-2), 83-114.
Katzman, D., Kanbur, N., & Steinegger, C. (2010). Medical screening and management of eating disorders in adolescents. In W. S. Agras
(Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders (pp. 267-291). New York: Oxford University Press.


Kaye, W., & Oberndorfer, T. (2010). Appetitive regulation in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. In W. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford
Handbook of Eating Disorders (pp. 75-102). New York: Oxford University Press.
Keel, P. K. (2010). Epidemiology and course of eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders (pp. 25-32).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Klump, K., Bulik, C., Kaye, W., Treasure, J., & Tyson, E. (2009). Academy for eating disorders position paper: Eating disorders are serious
mental illnesses. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 42, 97-103.
Klump, K., Wonderlich, S., Lehoux, P., Lilenfeld, L., & Bulik, C. (2002). Does environment matter? A review of non-shared environment
and eating disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 31, 118-135.
Lasègue, E. (1873). De l'anorexie hysterique. Archives Generales de Medicine, 21, 385-403.
Le Grange, D., & Lock, J. (2007). Treating Bulimia in Adolescents: A Family-Based Approach. New York: Guilford.
Levine, M., & Murnen, S. (2009). "Everybody knows that mass media are/are not a cause of eating disorders": A critical review of evidence
for a causal link between media, negative body image, and disordered eating in females. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 28, 9-
42.
Levine, M., & Smolak, L. (2010). Cultural influences on body image and the eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
Eating Disorders (pp. 223-246). New York: Oxford University Press.
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-Behavioural Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford Press.
Lock, J., & le Grange, D. (2012). Treatment Manual for Anorexia Nervosa (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.
Loucas, C. E., Fairburn, C. G., Whittington, C., Pennant, M. E., Stockton, S., & Kendall, T. (2014). E-therapy in the treatment and
prevention of eating disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 63, 122-131.
Lucas, A. (2008). Demystifying Anorexia Nervosa (Revised Edition). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.


Macdonald, P., Hibbs, R., Corfield, F., & Treasure, J. (2012). The use of motivational interviewing in eating disorders: A systematic review.
Psychiatry Research, 200(1), 1-11.
Malan, D. (1995). Individual Psychotherapy and the Science of Psychodynamics (Second Edition). London: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Mazzeo, S., & Bulik, C. (2009). Environmental and genetic risk factors for eating disorders: What the clinician needs to know. Child and
Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 18, 67-82.
McElroy, S., Guerdjikova, A., O'Melia, A., Mori, N., & Keck, J., & Paul, E. (2010). Pharmacotherapy of the eating disorders. In W. S. Agras
(Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders (pp. 417-451). New York: Oxford University Press.
Miller, W., & Rollnick. S (2012). Motivational Interviewing (Third Edition). New York: Guilford.
Mitchell, J., & Crow, S. (2010). Medical comorbidities of eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders (pp.
259-266). New York: Oxford University Press.
Newell, A. (2012). Using cognitive analytic therapy to understand and treat people with eating disorders. In J. Fox & K. Goss (Ed.), Eating
and Its Disorders (pp. 280-302). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
NICE. (2004). Eating Disorders: Core Interventions in the Treatment and Management of Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa and Related
eating Disorders. (Clinical Guideline 9). London: Author.
Palmer, B. (2000). Helping People with Eating Disorders. Chichester: Wiley.
Phillipou, A., Rossell, S. L., & Castle, D. J. (2014). The neurobiology of anorexia nervosa: A systematic review. Australian and New Zealand
Journal of Psychiatry, 48(2), 128-152.
Polnay, A., James, V.A.W., Hodges, L., Murray, G. D., Munro, C., & Lawrie, S. M. (2014). Group therapy for people with bulimia nervosa:
Systematic review and meta analysis. Psychological Medicine, 44(11), 2241-2254.
Prochaska, J., & Velicer, W. (1997a). The transtheoretical model of health behaviour change. American Journal of Health Promotion, 12,
38-48.


Prochaska, J., & Velicer, W. (1997b). Misinterpretations and misapplications of the transtheoretical model. American Journal of Health
Promotion, 12, 11-12.
Racine, S., Root, T., Klump, K., & Bulik, C. (2011). Environmental and genetic risk factors for eating disorders: A developmental
perspective. In D. Le Grange & J. Lock (Eds.), Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents: A Clinical Handbook (pp. 25-33). New York:
Guilford.
Raevuori, A., Keski-Rahkonen, A., & Hoek, H. W. (2014). A review of eating disorders in males. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 27(6), 426-
430.
Richards, L. (2003). Eating disorder services. In J. Treasure, U. Schmidt & E , van Furth (Eds.), Handbook of Eating Disorders (Second
Edition, pp. 325-332). Chichester: Wiley.
Royal College of Psychiatrists. (2002). Guidelines for the Nutritional Management of Anorexia Nervosa. A Report of the Eating Disorders
Special Interest Group. London: Author.
Royal College of Psychiatrists. (2010). MARSIPAN: Management of Really Sick Patients with Anorexia Nervosa. London: Author.
Russell, G. (1979). Bulimia nervosa: An ominous variant of anorexia nervosa? Psychological Medicine, 9, 429-448.
Scherag, S., Hebebrand, J., & Hinney, A. (2010). Eating disorders: The current status of molecular genetic research. European Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry, 19, 211-226.
Serpell, L., & Troup, N. (2003). Sociocultural theories of eating disorders. In J. Treasure, U. Schmidt, & E. van Furth (Eds.), Handbook of
Eating Disorders (Second Edition, pp. 151-167). Chichester: Wiley.
Singh, A. (2002). Recent and conceptualized basic research activities for eating disorder: A review and future directions. International
Medical Journal, 9, 83-85.
Steinhausen, H. (2011). Course and outcome. In D. Le Grange & J. Lock (Eds.), Eating disorders in children and adolescents: A clinical
handbook (pp. 90-104). New York: Guilford.


Steinhausen, J. (2002). The outcome of anorexia nervosa in the 20th century. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 1284-1293.
Stice, E. (2002). Risk and maintenance factors for eating pathology. A meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 825-848.
Striegel-Moore, R., & Bulik, C. (2007). Risk factors for eating disorders. American Psychologist. Special Issue: Eating Disorders, 62, 181-198.
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry. New York: Norton.
Tanofsky-Kraff, M., & Wilfley, D. (2010). Interpersonal psychotherapy for the treatment of eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The
Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders (pp. 348-372). New York: Oxford University Press.
Thompson-Brenner, H., Glass, S., & Westen, D. (2003). A multidimensional meta-analysis of psychotherapy for bulimia nervosa. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 10, 268-287.
Thompson-Brenner, H., Weingeroff, J., & Westen, D. (2009). Empirical support for psychodynamic psychotherapy for eating disorders.
In R. A. Levy, & J. S. Ablon (Eds.), Handbook of Evidence-Based Psychodynamic Psychotherapy: Bridging the Gap Between Science and Practice
(pp. 67-92). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
Treasure, J., & Bauer, B. (2003). Assessment and motivation. In J. Treasure, U. Schmidt & E. van Furth (Eds.), Handbook of Eating Disorders
(Second Edition, pp. 219-211). Chichester: Wiley.
Treasure, J., Smith, G., & Crane, A. (2007). Skills-Based Learning for Caring for a Loved One with an Eating Disorder: The New Maudsley
Method. London: Routledge.
Vögele, C., & Gibson, E. L. (2010). Mood, emotions, and eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders (pp.
180-205). New York: Oxford University Press.
Wade, T. D. (2010). Genetic influences on eating and the eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders
(pp. 103-122). New York: Oxford University Press.
Watson, H. J., & Bulik, C. M. (2013). Update on the treatment of anorexia nervosa: Review of clinical trials, practice guidelines and
emerging interventions. Psychological Medicine, 43(12), 2477-2500.


Weissman, M., Markowitz, J., & Klerman, G. (2000). Comprehensive Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
Wilson, G. (2010). Cognitive behavioural therapy for eating disorders. In W. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Eating Disorders (pp.
331-347). New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, G., & Fairburn, C. (2007). Treatments for eating disorders. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments That Work
(Third Edition, pp. 579-609). New York: Oxford University Press.
Winston, A., & Webster, P. (2003). Inpatient treatment. In J. Treasure, U. Schmidt, & E, van Furth (Eds.), Handbook of Eating Disorders
(Second Edition, pp. 349-367). Chichester: Wiley.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and
Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Zaitsoff, S., Pullmer, R., Cyr, M., & Aime, H. (2015). The role of the therapeutic alliance in eating disorder treatment outcomes: A
systematic review. Eating Disorders: The Journal of Treatment & Prevention, 23(2), 99-114.


Section 5 Other Significant Psychological Problems

Chapter 23 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults
Jessica Bramham
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-23
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common behavioural or neurodevelopmental disorders in childhood
and is characterised by inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity. This constellation of symptoms has been recognised for over a century,
albeit with different terminology such as 'minimal brain dysfunction' (Clements, 1966). It is only relatively recently that ADHD has been
considered as an adulthood neuropsychiatric condition. The validity of the diagnosis of ADHD in adulthood is supported by research
from genetic, neuroimaging and neuropsychology studies, as well as evidence of clear functional impairments displayed by graduates
of childhood ADHD. Prospective studies following children with ADHD into adult life indicate that the ADHD symptoms of impulsivity,
restlessness and inattention often continue into adolescence and adulthood (e.g. Faraone et al., 2006). More than half of children diagnosed
with ADHD continue to meet diagnostic criteria in adulthood (Barkley et al., 2002; Faraone et al., 2006). The majority of children with ADHD
(72-90%) continue to show at least one disabling symptom and evidence of clinically significant impairment in adult life (Biederman et al.,
2000).
Notwithstanding the converging evidence for the existence of ADHD in adulthood, there remains a sizeable number of sceptics amongst
mental health professionals and general practitioners who dispute the diagnosis. This can sometimes limit access to services for individuals

with ADHD and also leads to reluctance to treat, particularly with medication. Hopefully, with increasing awareness regarding the lifespan
course of the disorder, the situation will improve. However, given this context, it is particularly important for clinical psychologists working
with adults with ADHD to be rigorous and evidence-based in their approach to assessment and treatment.
This chapter begins with a case example. This is followed with a consideration of the clinical features and diagnostic criteria for ADHD
in adults, its epidemiology, comorbidities and aetiology. Since many referrals for adult ADHD will involve queries around diagnosis, a
detailed account of how to assess for ADHD in adulthood has been provided. Treatment strategies are then described, including both
pharmacological approaches and psychological interventions.
Case Example
John is 30 years old and is married with two children. His eldest son, aged 5, has just been diagnosed with ADHD. After researching ADHD on
the Internet, John recognised he had had many of the symptoms throughout his own life, and approached his GP to request a referral for an
assessment.
Regarding background history, John was the third and youngest child born to his parents. His mother had pre-eclampsia during pregnancy
and John was born 7 weeks early, weighing approximately 4 lbs. As an infant he had colic and chronic sleep difficulties. He reached all
developmental milestones on time and was said to 'run before he could walk'. During his toddler years, he used to often escape from the
house and was found wandering around the village. He attended a preschool and was described as lively and boisterous but very likeable.
When he started primary school, John found it hard to settle and had separation anxiety. His school reports stated that he was very
intelligent but was easily distracted and often daydreamed. He was well liked by his peers and often was the joker in the classroom.
Secondary school became more challenging for John and his academic performance became increasingly variable. He loved history and
languages and excelled in these areas, but hated most other subjects and teachers commented that he did not apply himself and was lazy. His


attendance at school was poor and he was often in detention for being late. His behaviour in the classroom was disruptive, particularly due
to excessive talking. He recalled being 'picked on' by teachers when he had been distracted and was made to stand at the front of the class
feeling embarrassed. His final school exam results were disappointing and he was unable to progress to college as a result.
John worked in various unskilled jobs for very short periods of time, often leaving impulsively due to boredom or after a minor conflict. He
eventually settled in employment in the public sector with the county council, which involved being out of the office doing site visits most
of the week. His timekeeping was always poor, but John was successful in this role as he was charismatic and there was limited paperwork.
He was recently promoted into a managerial position which required being based in the office. He was finding that he had great difficulty
completing tasks, made careless mistakes, often procrastinated and then stayed extremely late to complete unfinished work tasks. He also
found it difficult to remember what he was supposed to be doing and often missed meetings or important appointments. He particularly
disliked going to board meetings where he felt he was being scrutinised and exposed for his poor performance. He described feeling
constantly stressed and also recognised that his difficulties were affecting his marriage, as he was often fighting with his wife. He had
stopped going out with friends to the pub as he thought they were laughing behind his back, and he had begun drinking at home on his own.
John was also evaluated with a structured interview for assessment of adult ADHD. He was found to currently meet DSM-5 criteria for
seven out of nine inattentive symptoms and five out of nine hyperactive/impulsive symptoms. These symptoms were causing functional
impairment in the workplace and at home. On consideration of his retrospective report of childhood symptoms, an informant history from
his mother, and old school reports, it was determined that he had met criteria for diagnosis of childhood ADHD. John was also displaying
some symptoms of social anxiety that were likely to have arisen due to his experience with lifelong ADHD, as well as current stressors.
The treatment plan included both medication and psychological intervention based on cognitive behavioural therapy. John was prescribed
methylphenidate (Ritalin) and this was gradually titrated to an optimal dose. However, he found that he was having great difficulty getting
to sleep in the evenings and also that he often forgot to take tablets at the right time. He was therefore switched to a slow-release preparation
(Concerta) and these difficulties largely resolved.


After being diagnosed with ADHD, John was ecstatic that finally his problems had been recognised and that there was a reason for why he
had always felt different. The medication allowed him to concentrate and focus at work and he was being much more efficient. However, he
still found it very difficult to organise himself and was avoiding large social gatherings in case he would embarrass himself. He read more
about ADHD on the Internet and started wondering why it had not been recognised when he had been a child. He felt guilty for passing it on
to his son, and felt sorry that his wife had ended up married to such an inadequate person.
Cognitive behavioural therapy began with two sessions of psychoeducation about ADHD and adjusting to the diagnosis. It was helpful to
John to recognise all he had achieved, including some of his resilient personal qualities, and realise that it may be of benefit to his son with
ADHD in the future having a father who understood him. John's two main goals were to (1) complete a management course at night school
and (2) regain a social life.
The next three sessions focused on organisational skills and planning. Given John's chaotic approach to work, it was useful for him to track
all tasks and activities and bring them to the session for support in organising and scheduling, and to break down daunting projects into
smaller tasks. He also was encouraged to discuss his ADHD diagnosis with his employer, who then organised for him to access additional
administrative support.
The following three sessions involved continuation of organisation and planning skills development, but there was a shift in focus to
examining distractibility. It quickly became apparent that John was most distractible when he was facing more challenging social situations
or had a fear of failure. Together, John and the therapist examined his procrastination about applying for the management night course.
He was introduced to the concept of negative automatic thoughts, and asked to record his thoughts and evaluate their accuracy (using
procedures described in detail in Chapter 3). John was given behavioural experiments to address his anxiety in social situations and
practised cognitive skills for challenging negative automatic thoughts in these situations. The final sessions involved revisiting the skills he
had successfully developed during treatment and making contingency plans for future challenges.

Clinical Features of ADHD in Adults
DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria
DSM-III included a syndrome called attention deficit disorder (ADD; APA, 1980). This could be diagnosed with or without the presence of
additional hyperactivity (ADD +/- H). However, in the fourth and fifth revisions of DSM, ADD became ADHD, with three different diagnostic
subtypes (APA, 2000, 2013). It was also possible to diagnose ADHD in adults and not just in children.
There are many similarities but also certain differences between ADHD symptoms in children and adults. The DSM-5 criteria (APA, 2013)
are the same for both age groups and are the most widely used in practice. Diagnosis of adults with ADHD involves applying childhood
criteria to adulthood presentations, albeit requiring five rather than six symptoms to be present. Table 23.1 shows the diagnostic criteria
broken down into inattention symptoms and hyperactive/impulsive symptoms, as well as additional conditions regarding age of onset and
level of impairment.
Clinicians working with adults with ADHD are often concerned that the diagnostic criteria do not reflect common changes in ADHD
symptoms with increasing age. In particular, overt hyperactive-impulsive behavioural symptoms appear to decline significantly with
increasing age and become increasingly internalised, whereas inattentive symptoms show less recovery (Bramham et al., 2012; Hart et al.,
1995). This means that the vast majority of individuals with ADHD in adulthood present either with the combined or inattentive subtype.
Some in this latter category will previously have met criteria for combined type but no longer reach five out of nine hyperactive-impulsive
criteria, and therefore fall into the inattentive subtype category as adults. Very few adults with ADHD meet criteria for hyperactive-
impulsive subtype.
Table 23.1 DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for ADHD

1. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development, as
characterized by (1) and/or (2):
1. Inattention. Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with
developmental level and that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities: Note: The symptoms
are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defiance, hostility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older
adolescents and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or during other activities (e.g.,
overlooks or misses details, work is inaccurate).
b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has difficulty remaining focused during lectures,
conversations, or lengthy reading).
c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems elsewhere, even in the absence of any obvious distraction).
d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but
quickly loses focus and is easily side-tracked).
e. Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., difficulty managing sequential tasks; difficulty keeping materials and
belongings in order; messy, disorganized work; has poor time management; fails to meet deadlines).
f. Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require sustained mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or homework; for older
adolescents and adults, preparing reports, completing forms, reviewing lengthy papers).


g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials, pencils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses,
mobile telephones).
h. Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (for older adolescents and adults, may include unrelated thoughts).
i. Is often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., doing chores, running errands; for older adolescents and adults, returning calls, paying bills,
keeping appointments).
1. Hyperactivity-Impulsivity. Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is
inconsistent with developmental level and that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities: Note:
The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behaviour, defiance, hostility, or a failure to understand tasks or
instructions. For older adolescents and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet or squirms in seat.
b. Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected (e.g., leaves his or her place in the classroom, in the office or other
workplace, or in other situations that require remaining in place).
c. Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is inappropriate. (Note: In adolescents or adults, may be limited to feeling restless).
d. Often unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly.
e. Is often "on the go," acting as if "driven by a motor" (e.g., is unable to be or uncomfortable being still for extended time, as in
restaurants, meetings; may be experienced by others as being restless or difficult to keep up with).
f. Often talks excessively.
g. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed (e.g., completes people's sentences; cannot wait for turn in
conversation).

h. Often has difficulty waiting his or her turn (e.g., while waiting in line).
i. Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations, games, or activities; may start using other people's things
without asking or receiving permission; for adolescents and adults, may intrude into or take over what others are doing).
1. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present prior to age 12 years.
2. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms are present in two or more settings (e.g., at home, school, or work; with
friends or relatives; in other activities).
3. There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce the quality of, social, academic, or occupational functioning.
4. The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder and are not better
explained by another mental disorder (e.g., mood disorder, anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, personality disorder, substance
intoxication or withdrawal).
1. Specify whether:
2. 314.01 (F90.2) Combined presentation: If both Criterion A1 (inattention) and Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) are met for
the past 6 months.
3. 314.00 (F90.0) Predominantly inattentive presentation: If Criterion A1 (inattention) is met but Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-
impulsivity) is not met for the past 6 months.
4. 314.01 (F90.1) Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation: If Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) is met and Criterion
A1 (inattention) is not met for the past 6 months.
5. (For other specifiers, see DSM-5 pp. 60-61).


Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.
In clinical practice, there can be a further subtype of 'ADHD in partial remission' where more than six diagnostic criteria were met previously
but currently there are fewer than five symptoms in both categories, and yet there is persistent functional impairment. These individuals
may still suffer from specific symptoms that warrant treatment. They may have developed several comorbidities as a consequence of having
had ADHD, but the comorbidity may now be the primary presentation.
ICD-10 Hyperkinetic Disorder
The comparable diagnostic category in ICD-10 is 'hyperkinetic disorder' (World Health Organization, 1992). This classification system
defines hyperkinetic disorder as a persistent and severe impairment of psychological development characterised by 'early onset;
a combination of overactive, poorly modulated behaviour with marked inattention and lack of persistent task involvement; and
pervasiveness, over situations and persistence over time of these behavioural characteristics' (World Health Organization, 1992). ICD-10
acknowledges that hyperkinetic disorder can persist into adult life, but the diagnostic criteria stipulate there must be evidence of both
impaired attention and overactivity. This latter aspect of the disorder seems to show particular improvement with age, and therefore it is
rare that an individual is displaying marked overactivity that is developmentally inappropriate. Thus very few adults with ADHD would
actually meet criteria for diagnosis with ICD-10 of hyperkinetic disorder, and this term is rarely used in adulthood.
Epidemiology
The worldwide prevalence of ADHD has been estimated at 5.29-7.1% in children (Polanczyk et al., 2007). Prospective studies suggest that
an estimated 50-66% of children with ADHD continue to have the disorder as adults (Barkley et al., 2002; Faraone et al., 2006). Prevalence
estimates indicate that 3.4% (range 1.2-7.3%) of adults have ADHD (Fayyad et al., 2007). Prevalence data may vary across countries due

to factors such as population characteristics, and methodological and diagnostic factors rather than geographical location (Polanczyk et
al., 2007). However, there are no significant prevalence differences between countries, after controlling for the differences in diagnostic
algorithms used to define ADHD. It has therefore been argued that ADHD is not a cultural construct.
There are some gender differences in symptom presentation that may also be reflected in the subtypes of ADHD in adults. In childhood,
girls are more likely to have inattentive subtype ADHD, whereas boys are more likely to have hyperactive-impulsive or combined subtype
(Biederman et al., 2002). For adults with ADHD, the hyperactive-impulsive subtype is relatively rare (2%), with the majority of individuals
split between inattentive subtype (37%) or combined ADHD (56%) (Millstein et al., 1997). The ratio of males to females is approximately 4:1
in childhood but 2:1 in young adults and approaching even numbers in middle age (Bramham et al., 2012). One explanation for this change
in gender ratio is that the hyperactive-impulsivity symptoms more prevalent in boys are more likely to improve with age, and therefore they
no longer meet diagnostic criteria. In contrast, if attentional difficulties persist with age, this may explain why a relatively greater proportion
of females continues to maintain an inattentive subtype diagnostic status (Young & Bramham, 2007).
Comorbidity
Adults with ADHD are more likely to present with additional psychological disorders or psychosocial problems, with only 14% having just
a single diagnosis of ADHD (Kessler et al., 2006). The most common comorbidities are anxiety, depression or dysthymia, bipolar disorder,
personality disorders and substance use disorders (e.g. Friedrichs et al., 2012; Steinhausen et al., 2006). Given the high levels of comorbidity,
it is likely that many mental health practitioners are already seeing clients with a history of ADHD, but they are presenting to mental health
services with a more well-known clinical disorder as their primary complaint. Table 23.2 shows the prevalence rates of comorbid disorders
for adults diagnosed with ADHD. Further detail about presentation of comorbidities in the context of ADHD is given later in the assessment
section of this chapter.


Aetiology
ADHD is probably the most heritable psychiatric disorder, with concordance in identical twins of approximately 80% (Rietveld et al., 2003).
Parents with ADHD are over 50% more likely to have a child with ADHD and about 25% of children with ADHD have parents who meet
diagnostic criteria (Faraone & Doyle, 2001). Genetics therefore clearly have a role in the aetiology of ADHD. Several candidate genes that
regulate neurotransmitter function have been identified, particularly those associated with dopamine and noradrenaline, but no one single
gene is directly linked to ADHD. It is likely to be due to the interaction of several genes involved in the function of several neurotransmitters
(Thapar et al., 2013).
ADHD can also be considered a disorder of neurotransmitter function associated with dysregulation of dopamine and noradrenaline.
Dopamine is particularly important for working memory, regulating learning, maintaining response set and motivation. Noradrenaline is
involved in maintaining alertness and attention. Under-functioning of these neurotransmitters systems is hypothesised to underpin the
specific constellation of inattention, hyperactive and impulsive behaviours seen in ADHD. This is further supported by the finding that
pharmacological treatments for ADHD typically involve increasing levels of dopamine and noradrenaline (Arnsten, 2006).
Table 23.2 Comorbidities of Adults with ADHD
DSM-IV disorder
Prevalence in adults with ADHD (%)
Kessler et al. (2006) (current prevalence)
Bernardi et al. (2012)(lifetime prevalence)

Any mood disorder
38.3
60.5
Major depressive disorder
18.6
26.4
Dysthymia
12.8
6.09
Bipolar disorder
19.4
33.6
Any anxiety disorder
47.1
60.7
Generalised anxiety disorder
8.0
25.9
Panic disorder
11.9
21.9
Panic disorder
8.9
22.0
Agoraphobia
4.0
–
Specific phobia
22.7
35.7
Social phobia
29.3
22.8
OCD
2.7
–
Any substance use disorder
15.2
71.6
Alcohol abuse
5.9
18.0
Alcohol dependence
5.8
38.9
Drug abuse
2.4
27.8
Drug dependence
4.4
15.1
Any personality disorder
–
62.7
Borderline personality
–
33.6
Antisocial personality
–
18.8

There are also many prenatal and perinatal factors that are known to increase the likelihood of ADHD. These include alcohol use and
smoking during pregnancy, which can particularly affect development of the prefrontal and temporal cortices (e.g. Linnet et al., 2003;
Milberger et al., 1997; Neuman et al., 2007). Perinatal traumas can also be linked to ADHD, particularly those involving hypoxia or impaired
flow of oxygen to the brain, which can differentially disrupt the dopamine system (Lou et al., 2004). There are many other neurological
conditions that affect the prefrontal-subcortical circuitry that can lead to ADHD-like behaviours and symptoms including childhood stroke,
meningitis, encephalitis, autoimmune disorders and so forth (e.g. Bloom et al., 2001; Max et al., 2003).
Finally, there is evidence that extreme adversity in early childhood can result in ADHD symptoms (Lara et al., 2009). For example, there
are increased rates of attentional problems and hyperactivity in children who were raised in institutions (e.g. Kreppner et al., 2001). It
may be that disturbed attachment plays a role in the development of difficulties regulating attention and impulsivity, as well as emotions
(Biederman et al., 1995; Clarke et al., 2002) and attachment and autonomy problems can persist into adulthood (Koemans et al., 2015).
Therefore, overall, it is clear that broader gene-environment interactions may be involved in the aetiology of ADHD.

Assessment of ADHD in Adults

An assessment of ADHD in adulthood should address three main questions:

1. Is there evidence of ADHD as a child, that is, would the person have met DSM-5 diagnostic criteria as a child? If not, then they cannot be
diagnosed with ADHD as an adult and other differential diagnoses must be considered.
2. Is there evidence of ADHD as an adult, that is, does the person still meet DSM-5 criteria for diagnosis of adult ADHD?
3. Is there a better explanation for the difficulties, that is, a differential diagnosis such as autistic spectrum disorder, conduct disorder or
borderline personality disorder, or are there any further disorders/associated problems that are comorbid with the ADHD?


These questions should be explained to the client before the assessment begins. For example, a psychologist may say, 'We are carrying
out this assessment to find out (1) did you have ADHD as a child? (2) If so, do you still have it now? (3) Is there an alternative explanation
or anything else that is affecting you at the moment?' This allows the clinician to clarify whether this is consistent with the client's
expectations for the assessment. It also raises the possibility that the client may not have had ADHD early on, and that there may be another
way of understanding their difficulties.
In order to complete an assessment, it is beneficial to assimilate information from several different sources rather than rely solely on self-
report. These sources include a clinical interview with the client, clinical interview with a parent or informant about childhood behaviour,
standardised measures including neuropsychological assessment and rating scales, and school reports or occupational assessments.
Assessment Interview
An assessment of adult ADHD can take considerable time if performed thoroughly. This is because it requires much more detailed
consideration of childhood presentation than standard intake interviews, and also an informant interview where possible. Also, given that
many people coming forward for an assessment of ADHD in adulthood will have done their own research into the disorder, there is the
potential for confirmatory biases and for them to endorse experiencing all or most symptoms. It is, therefore, particularly important to avoid
leading questions and ask for specific examples of how each symptom impacts on functioning in order to determine whether it is causing
clinical impairment.
Presentation of Inattention Symptoms in Adults with ADHD
In adults with ADHD, the inattentive symptoms are often their primary complaint, particularly forgetfulness and memory problems. They
can have difficulties giving attention to details and make simple mistakes. In contrast, however, some adults with ADHD have developed
compensatory strategies through bitter experience of making mistakes and may become overly perfectionistic or over-focus on tasks. They

make few errors but report that they need far greater time to complete work than other colleagues. Tasks that involve details, such as
completing long forms, can become very stressful and lead to avoidance. This is particularly problematic for jobs that require sustained
attention for an activity that does not hold any particular interest, such as tidying up or keeping accounts. In contrast, when an activity is
interesting or stimulating for the individual, then they may be able to sustain their attention for long periods. This motivational aspect of
ADHD can be particularly frustrating for partners and friends of adults with ADHD, who may be perplexed about why the person can spend
hours playing computer games but not doing the ironing.
Other symptoms of ADHD in adulthood are often more apparent to those around them than the individual themselves. For example,
adults with ADHD often receive complaints that they do not listen and that it is difficult to gain their attention. Even when they appear to
have heard, they may forget what was said and not follow through on instructions. People sometimes comment that they appear 'zoned-out'
or 'not tuned in'. This may reflect an internal distractibility where they are being distracted by their own thoughts.
External distractions are common for adults with ADHD and it seems that they seem to adapt to this problem in one of two ways. Some
people try to overcome their distractibility by requiring absolute silence and find it impossible to concentrate otherwise. Others try to
harness their distractibility by multitasking and trying to do several activities at once. The disadvantage of this latter strategy is that it often
leaves several tasks unfinished as each task becomes a distraction for the next. This approach can also seem relatively chaotic and may lead
to items being lost and difficulties coordinating activities, for example, by being late or missing deadlines. It often also means that partners,
family and friends may take on much of the organisational responsibilities in order to support the person with ADHD.
Presentation of Hyperactivity Symptoms in Adults with ADHD
Hyperactivity symptoms are usually less apparent in adults in comparison with children with ADHD. This may be as a result of increased
levels of motor control, or could be due to learning through numerous adverse experiences when overactivity has been punished. Some
external symptoms of hyperactivity may still be apparent in adulthood such as fidgeting, picking at fingers, or tapping hands or feet.

However, adults with ADHD often describe their hyperactivity as being more internal, that they feel a constant sense of restlessness and
cannot relax. Although children often leave their seat when they are expected to remain sitting, such as at mealtimes or in the classroom, an
adult with ADHD may be more likely to stay in their chair, but they may shuffle and change position frequently and feel a huge relief when
they are finally able to get up and leave. This restlessness or 'inner motor' can also mean that people with ADHD prefer being 'on the go' or
always busy, and this can make going on holidays or relaxing at home rather difficult. It can also lead to excessive talking whereby people
with ADHD can be perceived as dominating a conversation and the other person attempting a dialogue does not feel heard. Sometimes people
with ADHD admit using their constant talking as a strategy because they find it incredibly difficult to listen and concentrate on what other
people are saying.
Presentation of Impulsivity Symptoms in Adults with ADHD
Impulsivity symptoms can also affect give-and-take in conversations, as some people with ADHD experience a subjective sense of other
people talking too slowly or find it difficult to wait for them to finish. Difficulties with response inhibition may also predispose people with
ADHD to interrupt or say what springs to mind without considering whether it is appropriate or timely. Sometimes this can be amusing but
often it can cause offence or be perceived as social ineptness.
Table 23.3 summarises ADHD symptoms and gives specific examples of how they may present in adults.
Table 23.3 Examples of Symptom Presentation in Adulthood
Inattention symptoms

1. Inattention to detail Examples: Rushing through work, missing important details, not checking over, being described as messy or
sloppy, making careless mistakes
2. Difficulty sustaining attention in activities Examples: Difficulty staying focused when reading, watching films, lectures; taking a
lot longer than others to complete tasks because mind has wandered; needing to reread the same passage several times
3. Not listening Examples: People complaining that you have selective hearing; needing things to be repeated; missing key parts of
information when being told
4. Not following through on instructions Examples: Leaving things half-finished and starting something else; difficulty with
multistep instructions; needing to write things down, otherwise they will be forgotten
5. Difficulty organising tasks Examples: Problems with prioritising; spending too long on irrelevant details; time-management
difficulties
6. Avoiding/disliking tasks requiring sustained mental effort Examples: Procrastination and putting things off until the last minute;
finding mundane activities significantly more boring than other people
7. Losing important items Examples: Losing mobile phones, keys, wallet, glasses, coats; spending a lot of time looking for items; having
to put items in exactly the same place otherwise they will never be found
8. Distractibility Examples: Difficulty in concentrating on conversations in busy places; needing isolation in order to get work done;
chopping and changing activities frequently; losing track of what one is saying in mid-flow
9. Forgetfulness Examples: Making errors in long-established routines; forgetting appointments; forgetting to bring what is needed for
appointments; needing to have reminders/alarms more than the average person Hyperactivity/impulsivity symptoms

10. Squirming and fidgeting Examples: Unable to sit completely still; tapping pencil or feet so that people notice and comment; having
to consciously resist fidgeting
11. Inability to stay seated Examples: Choosing to walk around rather than sit; forcing self to remain seated at times; inventing excuses
so that can get up and out of seat in meetings, restaurants, etc.; avoiding going to functions that involve sitting still for long periods
12. Restlessness Examples: Feeling physically restless; feeling agitated when it is not possible to exercise; feeling internally restless and
having excessive mental energy
13. Difficulty playing/working quietly Examples: Feeling agitated when doing activities alone such as reading a book, listening to
music; always needing to be busy after work or when on holiday
14. On the go, "driven by a motor" Examples: Finding it hard to slow down; difficulty relaxing when others are calm; feeling like there
is a lot of pent-up energy
15. Talking excessively Examples: Talking more than other people; people complaining that they cannot get a word in edgeways;
feeling a need to fill silences in a conversation
16. Blurting out answers Examples: Saying things before someone has finished speaking; saying things that spring to mind even if they
do not follow in the conversation; saying things without thinking and then causing offence
17. Cannot wait for turn Examples: Finding it difficult waiting in traffic or queues; avoiding situations where waiting will be necessary;
giving up when required to wait; getting very frustrated with people being slow ahead
18. Intruding/interrupting on others Examples: Talking over people in conversations; not waiting for an appropriate pause to
contribute in meetings; finding it difficult to stop asking personal questions when inappropriate

There are several semi-structured interview schedules available that cover ADHD symptoms in both childhood and adulthood. Details of
some of these are provided at the end of the chapter. They include the Diagnostic Inventory VA (DIVA; Kooij & Francken, 2010) and Conners's
Adult ADHD Diagnostic Inventory for DSM (CAADID; Conners et al., 2001).

Functional Impairment in Adults with ADHD
As with the diagnosis of many psychiatric disorders, an individual with ADHD must present with symptoms but also exhibit significant
functional impairment. In adulthood, people with ADHD often seem to report that the inattentive symptoms such as being forgetful,
disorganised and chaotic cause them greatest difficulty in maintaining their daily responsibilities, both at work and at home. It may be
that for children a lot of these 'executive' tasks are carried out by parents, whereas in adult life, people with ADHD can struggle much more
with day-to-day administration such as paying bills, remembering appointments and being punctual. Failing to perform these tasks can
inevitably lead to difficulties with employment and financial management. In addition, functional impairments can be evident in the social
domain, particularly with regard to the quality of relationships. Adults with ADHD are more likely to have had multiple partners and also
have increased divorce rates (Wilens & Dodson, 2004). A similar pattern seems to be present in many friendships which people with ADHD
find difficult to maintain because they get bored, are unreliable at keeping in contact, or because they fall out due to an argument or a fight
(Young & Bramham, 2007, 2013).
When assessing adults with ADHD, it is useful to ask about how the ADHD symptoms affect them in the following areas:

• Work or occupational difficulties
Leisure and recreational activities
• Social interactions
• Relationships

• Management of money
• Driving
• Offending behaviour.
Additional Symptoms in Adults with ADHD
There are also several well-known additional symptoms or diagnostic characteristics that often present in adults with ADHD but are not
included in diagnostic criteria (Barkley, 2015; Wender et al., 2001; Young & Bramham, 2007, 2013). These include:
• Emotional lability. Adults with ADHD can find their mood changing very rapidly in response to situations. They may have a hot temper
and explosive outbursts, but these are short-lived and mood can settle relatively quickly afterwards.
• Over-focusing. In order to compensate for problems with attention to detail, some adults with ADHD develop a strategy of narrowing
their focus such that they become completely absorbed in an activity at the expense of all else.
• Procrastination. This is not a core symptom of ADHD, but it is rare to find an adult with ADHD who does not procrastinate. This may
involve avoidance of aversive and effortful tasks, and may also be due to motivational difficulties.
• Sleep problems. Given that ADHD involves dysregulation of the arousal system, it is understandable that sleep is commonly affected. This
can mean that people have difficulty falling asleep or maintaining sleep. It can also be related to organisational and planning difficulties,
as well as procrastination.
Background History in Adults with ADHD
The key background areas that need to be examined will be described in turn.


Pregnancy and Birth History
Risk factors for development of ADHD include maternal smoking, alcohol use, illicit substance use during pregnancy, low birth weight and
prematurity births. Perinatal trauma indicators such as the umbilical cord being wrapped around the neck or anoxia are also associated with
ADHD.
Infant Behaviours
Children with ADHD are more likely to have difficult temperaments, colic and sleep problems. They are also likely to be much more
active from an early age and described as 'into everything'. They may also be distractible and not as interested in activities that require
concentration such as jigsaws, stories and so forth. Parents often find these things more noticeable when comparing their children with and
without ADHD.
Educational History
Enquiries about educational history should start with preschool years because some behavioural differences can be noticed even in
playgroup, where teachers may have commented that a child was more lively or active than others, or had difficulty concentrating in
comparison with peers.
The adjustment to school in the first year is useful to investigate. However, it is also important to find out about the culture of the school,
whether there was a more relaxed approach to discipline or whether there was great emphasis on conforming. Many children with ADHD
can be accommodated in smaller primary schools or where there is more flexibility around behaviour, and therefore go unnoticed until
expectations concerning discipline and academic demands increase.
The transition to secondary school can be critical for children with ADHD. There are many more demands on organisational skills and
memory, since children often have to move between classrooms for lessons and remember several different books and equipment for


extracurricular activities. There is also a greater expectation for them to be autonomous and self-motivated. Approach to homework is often
very revealing. Adolescents with ADHD avoid homework, take longer to do it than other children, require their parents to take a much more
active role in ensuring that it is completed, or frequently do not do complete some or all of their homework.
School reports can provide objective evidence of patterns of poor attention or distractibility, talkativeness and underperformance. It is not
uncommon to see a pattern of deterioration in school performance over secondary school where children with ADHD begin well in first year
but struggle as they progress from one year to the next and demands increase. Truancy and other disruptive behaviours can emerge.
Third-level courses often prove challenging for individuals with ADHD. In such courses there is an expectation of autonomous learning
and limited structure. Common ADHD strategies such as last-minute cramming are not always possible, given the scope and quantity of
learning required. It is useful to ask about clients' approaches to assessments. The demands of continuous assessment often lead people with
ADHD procrastinate. It is also useful to ask clients about their experience of larger lectures versus smaller, more interactive seminars. Young
people with ADHD tend to find larger lectures more challenging than small-group learning experiences.
Occupational History
Adults with ADHD are more likely to have changed jobs more frequently than those without ADHD. This can be due to impulsive decision
making to leave a post, or poor performance which leads to them being fired. They are also more likely to be unemployed and have difficulty
finding appropriate work. There can be a discrepancy between their higher level of ability or potential and the lower level of skill required for
their job work, due to lack of qualifications. This means that they are more likely to become bored or frustrated at work.
Social Relationship History
As mentioned earlier, ADHD is likely to affect relationships and lead to more volatile or disruptive relationship patterns. Some children with
ADHD are described as having lots of friends but never any close friendships. In forming romantic attachments, adults with ADHD may have

difficulty sustaining relationships due to difficulties with planning and organisation, often frustrating their partners.
Forensic History
Children with ADHD often present with comorbid conduct disorder. It is therefore not surprising that another negative outcome associated
with adult ADHD is higher rates of offending behaviour and involvement with the criminal justice system. Adults with ADHD have more
convictions for speeding fines, driving without a licence and hit-and-run crashes (Fischer et al., 2007). Childhood ADHD predicts increased
levels of contact with police during adulthood (Rasmussen & Gilberg, 2000) and court records show adolescents with an ADHD diagnosis
are 4–5 times more likely to be arrested (Mannuzza et al., 1989). There are several possible reasons why people with ADHD end up on the
wrong side of the law. One suggestion is that impulsivity symptoms may predispose individuals to commit opportunistic crimes or exhibit
aggressive behaviour due to difficulties with inhibiting anger. Another explanation is that offending is elevated in ADHD due to its high
comorbidity with conduct disorder. Therefore it could be antisocial traits that lead individuals towards crime, rather than ADHD symptoms
per se. A third explanation is that some people with ADHD develop criminal behaviour in order to support an alcohol or drug addiction.
Alcohol and Substance use History
Elevated intake of alcohol and substance use are common in adults with ADHD. However, it is also useful to examine the context and impact
of use as well as frequency and quantity. Many people with ADHD drink alcohol or use substances when they are feeling agitated or restless,
or as an avoidance strategy. Sometimes people with ADHD who have experimented with illicit stimulant drugs report that they felt that
amphetamines and cocaine actually calmed them down rather than speeded them up like their peers. This may be due to the similarities
between these drugs and medications used to treat ADHD. Similarly, caffeine and nicotine use should also be assessed in adults with ADHD.
Both substances are stimulants and may be used to excess in order to reduce ADHD symptoms, albeit with adverse physical consequences.


Family History
Given the high levels of heritability of ADHD, it is important to ask whether there are other family members who have been diagnosed with
ADHD or other related neurodevelopmental conditions such as dyslexia, dyspraxia and autism spectrum disorder. Enquiries about other
family psychiatric history can also be informative. Where other family members have addictions, mood disorders or antisocial behaviour,
this may suggest the presence of possible comorbidities in clients with ADHD.
Assessing for Comorbidities
Anxiety
Anxiety in the context of ADHD can be seen from an early age. Children with ADHD may develop concerns about their competence and have
performance anxiety or avoidance of particular tasks or situations that extends into adult life. They may have a fear of failure and exhibit
anticipatory anxiety, which inevitably can lead to a vicious cycle. Social anxiety can also arise through negative social experiences, such
that some adults with ADHD have marked self-consciousness and are very susceptible to embarrassment or humiliation. Anxiety can be a
particularly problematic comorbidity as it can interfere with functioning and exacerbate pre-existing attentional difficulties.
Depression
Depression is another common coexisting disorder and it is not difficult to understand why individuals with ADHD may be predisposed to
low mood. There are several risk factors for depression that are more common for children with ADHD, such as school underachievement
and low self-esteem. Difficulties with completing tasks may deny individuals with ADHD the opportunity to feel a sense of achievement
or mastery. People with undiagnosed ADHD have often been misunderstood and received criticism for being 'lazy' or 'stupid', which can be

internalised and lead to low self-worth. The diagnosis of ADHD in adulthood itself can sometimes trigger a depressive episode or low mood,
as an individual may begin to reflect on how their life might have been different or grieve for the childhood that they never had.
Bipolar Disorder
There is an ongoing debate regarding whether ADHD and bipolar disorder can coexist, and if they can, the extent of the comorbidity (e.g.
Wozniak et al., 1995). Mood regulation problems or emotional lability are common in adults with ADHD, with changes in affect occurring
over relatively short time periods. This may be due to a general difficulty with regulatory processes affecting not just motor and cognitive
response inhibition, but also emotional control. Such mood 'swings' may be interpreted as the cyclical changes associated with a bipolar
disorder presentation, particularly in the context of dysthymia or depression. Therefore in studies examining the comorbidity of bipolar
disorder and ADHD which involve a brief screening diagnostic procedure, it is possible that this symptom is double-counted. However, an
alternative explanation is that comorbidity is due to a common diathesis leading to a vulnerability to both illnesses (Sachs et al., 2000).
Personality Disorder
There are possible diagnostic overlaps for certain personality disorders and ADHD in adulthood. For example, the criteria for borderline
personality disorder include impulsivity, irritability, emotion regulation difficulties and unstable relationships, which could all be regarded
as part of an ADHD presentation. For diagnosis, ADHD symptoms have to be present across different settings and be persistent, in the same
way that personality traits are pervasive, so it is possible that misdiagnoses are made. However, it has been shown that a childhood diagnosis
of ADHD affects personality development towards cluster B type personalities, which include tendencies towards being dramatic, emotional
or erratic (Anckarsäter et al., 2006).
Substance use
All of the aforementioned comorbid difficulties can lead to maladaptive coping for adults with ADHD, particularly in terms of alcohol and

substance misuse. However, there are also other explanations for why there are elevated rates of alcohol and substance misuse amongst
individuals with ADHD. One explanation is that the ADHD characteristics of impulsivity and risk-taking encourage them to try substances
and find it difficult to resist cravings. Another suggestion is that people with ADHD use substances to try to self-medicate their symptoms.
Stimulant drugs such as amphetamines or cocaine have similar properties to treatments for ADHD. Increased levels of caffeine and nicotine
use occur in people with ADHD, and it is proposed that they may have some impact on symptoms given that these both have stimulant
properties. However, the most commonly used substances for people with ADHD are alcohol and cannabis (Sullivan & Rudwick-Levin, 2001).
People with ADHD report drinking alcohol and smoking cannabis to reduce restlessness and help them to relax, as well as to relieve low mood
and anxiety. Using such substances can of course compound ADHD problems with attention and response inhibition, beginning another
vicious cycle (Young & Bramham, 2007, 2013).

Standardised Measures
Rating Scales
There are several self-report rating scales available for adults with ADHD, based on the core symptoms and additional difficulties (Rösler
et al., 2006). Scales which assess current symptoms include Conners's Adult ADHD Rating Scales (CAARS; Conners et al., 1999), the Barkley
Adult ADHD Rating Scale (BAARS; Barkley, 2011), the Adult ADHD Rating Scale (AARS; Adler et al., 2003), and the Brown (1996) ADHD
Rating Scales. There are also scales that involve rating childhood symptoms of ADHD retrospectively, including the Wender Utah Scale (Ward
et al., 1993) and a child form of the Barkley ADHD Rating Scale (Barkley & Murphy, 1998).
These measures have been shown to have good inter-rater reliability both in adulthood and childhood (e.g. Grogan & Bramham, 2015).
However, they lack sensitivity to ADHD, and scores are often elevated in other conditions including depression, bipolar disorder, substance


use disorder and anxiety. Therefore, extreme caution should be exerted when interpreting high scores on rating scales, and a diagnosis
should only be given when elevated scores are supported by the clinical history and other more objective measures.
Neuropsychological Assessment of ADHD in Adults
A neuropsychological assessment of ADHD can be important for providing objective evidence of attentional, impulsivity and executive
functioning difficulties. It can be particularly useful in situations where the diagnosis is ambiguous or also when working with other
professionals who are sceptical about the existence of ADHD and are more persuaded by concrete data. Nevertheless, some clinicians are
confident in diagnosing ADHD in adults without a neuropsychological assessment based on behavioural presentation alone, whereas others
prefer to corroborate the diagnosis with cognitive assessment.
Evidence of deficits on a neuropsychological assessment can be a good indicator of ADHD cognitive difficulties. However, the absence of
any difficulties does not rule out the possibility of ADHD (Woods et al., 2002). This is because the nature of cognitive deficits in ADHD
is much more variable than in other neuropsychological disorders such as brain injury. Indeed, variability of performance is sometimes
regarded as one of the key indicators of ADHD rather than reduced performance per se. The testing environment is particularly conducive for
people with ADHD to perform well; that is, there are minimal distractions, the assessor is sequencing the tasks for them and they are likely
to be motivated to perform well.
Nevertheless, some of the behavioural observations that can be made during a neuropsychological assessment can be particularly
informative. For example, some individuals can noticeably find tasks, such as digit span or sustained attention tasks, much more effortful
than those without ADHD. Distractibility can be apparent, with clients noticing even very subtle noises from outside the room or activities
outside the window. They may be more likely to make tangential comments or find it difficult to withhold their comments during timed
tasks, even when reminded not to speak. Sometimes (but not always) fidgeting or regular readjustment of seating position can be apparent.
However, some individuals with ADHD will not display these types of behaviours in the assessment, and absence does not rule out ADHD.


Adults with ADHD exhibit a range of neuropsychological deficits similar to children with ADHD, which mainly fall under the umbrella
of executive function. Meta-analyses of neuropsychological studies of adults with ADHD show reliable impairments in several cognitive
functions including attention (e.g. Continuous Performance Test; Stroop; Letter Cancellation Test); response inhibition (e.g. Matching
Familiar Figures Test; Stop Signal Task); memory (e.g. Digit Span; Verbal Learning; Logical Memory); and processing speed (e.g. Trails A;
Reaction Time tasks) (Hervey et al., 2004). Complex attention variables and verbal memory discriminate best between ADHD participants
and controls. In contrast to results reported in children, performance on traditional tests of executive functions (e.g. Wisconsin Card Sorting;
Tower of Hanoi) has not been found to be generally reduced in adult ADHD patients (Schoechlin & Engel, 2005).
The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (Fourth Edition, WAIS-IV; Wechsler, 2008, 2010) is a good starting point for assessing adult ADHD
for two reasons. First, it is useful to be able to compare someone's estimated level of general intellectual ability with academic attainment.
Often in adults with ADHD, it is clear that they have not achieved their potential in education and have much lower grades in school
and college exams than expected given their ability level. Second, the WAIS-IV allows cognitive domains often affected by ADHD (Working
Memory; Processing Speed) to be identified in comparison with those which are less likely to be affected (Verbal Comprehension; Perceptual
Reasoning). If only those measures specific to ADHD such as memory or executive functioning tasks are performed in isolation, then it is not
possible to determine if these domains are differentially affected. For example, if someone performs in the average range for attentional tasks
but their overall intellectual ability is in the superior range, this represents a specific deficit in attention for that individual. Further cognitive
testing with more focused tasks can then be completed if necessary.
Formulation
The main formulation can be structured around the three main questions posed at the beginning of the assessment concerning childhood
ADHD (main presenting symptoms); adult ADHD (main presenting symptoms); and comorbidities or differential diagnosis (with some
explanation of how these are likely to have arisen). Explanation of the findings to the client and how the decision was reached will help to set

the scene for future interventions. Predisposing factors within formulations are often common risk factors identified in research on ADHD
such as family history, prenatal and perinatal problems, and adverse early environments. Maintaining factors may include maladaptive
strategies or bad habits the individual has adopted which exacerbate attentional or impulse control difficulties, including avoidance
behaviours. Protective factors may be environmental, such as being in flexible employment, or may be social, such as having a supportive
partner and family.
When ADHD is Ruled Out
Giving feedback when someone does not meet criteria for a diagnosis of ADHD can be challenging, as sometimes individuals have pinned
their hopes on this diagnosis being an explanation and offering hope that things can change. It can be helpful to acknowledge that the
symptoms are obviously very real and impairing for the person. However, the vast majority of psychological and psychiatric disorders also
have some impact on attentional functioning and formulating carefully around the more likely aetiology will be helpful.
Treatments for Adults with ADHD
Pharmacological Treatments
Biological or pharmacological treatments, such as methylphenidate, are recommended as the first-line intervention for adults with ADHD
according to the UK NICE guidelines (NICE, 2013). Before starting drug treatment for adults with ADHD a medical assessment should be
completed. This should include a full physical examination including heart rate and blood pressure, enquiry about family history of cardiac
disease, and examination of the cardiovascular system with electrocardiogram (ECG), if appropriate. This is because stimulants may have an
adverse impact on cardiovascular function, although there is some controversy about studies supporting this (Nissen, 2006). Weight should
also be monitored, as stimulants are known to suppress appetite. However, this is often less of a concern for adults in contrast with children.


There are two main families of drugs that are used to treat ADHD: stimulants and non-stimulants (Prince et al., 2015). Table 23.4 outlines
the generic name as well as some brand names, duration of action, and preparations of commonly prescribed medications for ADHD.
Methylphenidate, a stimulant, is usually the first drug to be trialled in cases of ADHD in adults and children. It is the most studied and
most frequently used drug and is generally well tolerated. These stimulant treatments work through acting on the dopaminergic system
by blocking dopamine transporters and increasing intra-synaptic dopamine and noradrenaline (Levy, 1991). It should be noted that many
individuals without ADHD who take stimulants may experience improvements in concentration and attention, and therefore a positive
response to these medications cannot be regarded as an indication of ADHD. However, the magnitude of the response and the normalisation
of impairment for people with the disorder is most clinically persuasive. Response rates for methylphenidate for adults with ADHD can be as
high as 74% (e.g. Spencer et al., 1995). Many adults with ADHD who are treated with medication for the first time report experiencing a new
clarity of thought, as though a fog has lifted, and increased capacity for concentration. Nonetheless, it is inevitable that having experienced
a lifetime of ADHD symptoms and given the increased likelihood of a comorbid condition, it is unlikely that medication can provide a
complete amelioration of difficulties.
Table 23.4 Commonly Prescribed Medications for Adults with ADHD
Stimulants
Brand name
Duration
Preparations
Methylphenidate
Ritalin
3-4 hours
5, 10, 20 mg
Concerta
12 hours
18, 36, 54 mg
Dexamphetamine
Dexedrine
4-6 hours
5 mg

Adderall XR
8 hours
5, 10, 20, 30 mg
Lisdexamfetamine
Vyvanse
12 hours
Non-stimulants
Atomoxetine
Guanfacine
Strattera
Intuniv
24 hours
24 hours
30, 50, 70 mg
10, 25, 40 mg
1, 2, 3, 4 mg
The main side effects of methylphenidate include nausea, difficulty falling asleep, loss of appetite, weight loss and anxiety (Aagaard &
Hansen, 2013). Many adults complain of a 'rebound phenomenon' when the medication is wearing off, and this can make them more
irritable. In order to counteract this, sometimes prescribers recommend using a long-acting drug during the day and then a short-acting one
as a top-up for the end of the day. Some adjustments around timing of doses may need to be made in order to reduce the possibility of sleep
difficulties.
Atomoxetine is often considered in adults who have been unresponsive or intolerant to an adequate trial of methylphenidate, usually
after about 6 weeks. It also may be the first choice for individuals where stimulants are contraindicated or where there is concern about the
possibility of diversion or misuse. It is a noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor and works in a similar way to many antidepressant medications,
taking several weeks before a response can be detected. The main side effects are nausea, constipation, insomnia, decreased libido, dizziness
and sweating (Michelson et al., 2003).
Many physicians working with adults with ADHD have concerns about prescribing stimulants such as methylphenidate. This may be
partly due to the fact that adults are not listed in the approved patient group in product information for methylphenidate and other
stimulants. Usually product information recommends stimulants for ADHD in children only. A second concern for physicians unfamiliar

with prescribing for adult ADHD is the possibility of misuse of stimulants. However, this is changing over time as awareness about the
benefits of prescribing stimulants for adult ADHD increases.
Psychological Treatments
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy for Adults with ADHD
A meta-analysis of controlled studies of the efficacy of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) treatment in adults with ADHD showed that CBT
(as part of a multimodal intervention including stimulants) is a feasible and acceptable treatment strategy that leads to improvement in
ADHD symptoms and comorbid problems (Mongia & Hechtman, 2012). Common elements across the various treatment packages include
psychoeducation, training in concrete skills (e.g. organisation and planning strategies) and emphasis on outside practice and maintenance
of these strategies in daily life. It is important to note that the majority of CBT treatment trials have been conducted with participants taking
medication. It is therefore often seen as an adjunct to medication rather than an alternative, although for those who do not wish to take
medication or have had a limited response, then it can be a stand-alone treatment. The short-term nature of CBT treatment can be seen as
appealing for some clients and also its structured nature is helpful. The overall aim is to train clients to use compensatory strategies and
skills in order to become their own therapist. The therapist also needs to understand that a client with ADHD will have to work much harder
to acquire these skills and that asking someone with ADHD to learn self-regulation is a tall order.
A typical CBT formulation of ADHD in adulthood would involve the premise that ADHD is a neurobiological disorder with core symptoms
that impact on day-to-day functioning (Knouse, 2015). The interaction of these core symptoms with the environment results in functional
impairment in multiple domains, such as problems with self-management (behaviours) and also patterns of dysfunctional thinking
(cognitive).


CBT treatment Planning
Table 23.5 shows a typical treatment plan for an adult with ADHD, and the following section outlines how each component may be delivered.
As a general rule, less is more. It is tempting to give lots of information and detail about each area in the hope that the client will be able to
pick which skills suit them. However, this can be particularly overwhelming and disempowering for clients. It is preferable to work in a very
focused way at firmly integrating a particular skill into day-to-day life before moving on to training clients in the next skill.
Psychoeducation
ADHD is frequently described as not a disorder of 'knowing what to do', but a disorder of 'doing what you know'. This concept can be
helpful for clients to grasp. It can be a relief for them to realise that they are not just being 'lazy' or 'stupid'. It may also dispel any myths
they have about the concept of ADHD. Recognising ADHD as a neurobiological disorder that clients need to manage can be a useful way of
reframing their difficulties. Therefore the main focus is not on eliminating symptoms and curing the disorder, but on reducing its impact
and increasing function. While medication can help to some extent with the reduction of ADHD symptoms, it acts in a similar way to
wearing glasses: there is improvement when wearing them, but the underpinning problem still remains. By experiencing ADHD through
childhood and beyond, clients will have developed many coping strategies. Some may be adaptive and some may be less helpful for reducing
or managing ADHD. Through engaging in CBT, it is possible for clients to develop skills and compensatory strategies to minimise the impact
of ADHD symptoms and learn new ways for approaching situations that have previously been challenging.
Table 23.5 Summary of Adult ADHD CBT Treatment Plan
Goals
Exercises/activities

Psychoeducation
Understanding about ADHD and its impact
Understanding the CBT model
Reviewing what is and what isn't ADHD
Presenting the CBT model with interaction
between thoughts, feelings, behaviours
Adjustment
Acceptance of ADHD diagnosis
Review of the challenges ADHD has given
Identification of possible positive aspects and
strengths
Organisation and planning Increasing ability to organize and prioritise
Improving sense of control
Developing a single calendar system Task lists
and prioritizing techniques Problem solving
through breaking down tasks Identifying time-
wasting traps
Distractibility reduction
Increasing on-task behaviour and completion of
activities
Collect data on attention span and likely
distractors Developing visual and auditory
reminders Stimulus control methods
Adaptive thinking
Identifying maladaptive negative automatic
thoughts Reducing procrastination
Thought-record forms Identifying thinking
errors, particularly around procrastination
Evaluating evidence for the accuracy of thoughts
Preparing for the future
Continuation of previous gains from treatment
Troubleshooting of recurrent problems
Reviewing clients use of different techniques
Note: Based on Mitchell et al. (2008).

Adjustment to ADHD
Some people start their treatment journey for ADHD by being relieved that they have finally been understood and that there is an

explanation for their problems. This can then swing into regret, when they realise that they may not be able to achieve their full potential
due to the severe and chronic difficulties associated with ADHD. That is, they may become overwhelmed by being diagnosed with a
debilitating, chronic, potentially lifelong disorder. There can almost be a grief reaction for what might have been possible in their lives. It is
therefore useful for the therapist to engage clients in a review of their life experience and achievements that have been possible despite the
ADHD and to recognise some of the strengths that have arisen out of coping with the challenges of living with ADHD. It is also helpful to
acknowledge that there can be many positive aspects of ADHD that individuals are proud, of such as increased creativity, flexible thinking,
extra energy, optimism and enthusiasm, and being fun-loving and gregarious.
Organisation and Planning Skills
Training clients in organisation and planning skills involves teaching them basic skills for structuring their time and their environment
to best support them and help them to minimise the negative impact of their ADHD symptoms on their quality of life. A core skill here is
using a diary to plan daily and weekly schedules. However, there are numerous external aids now available beyond a traditional paper-and-
pencil diary that can be extremely helpful for people with ADHD, particularly certain applications on smartphones. The first task can be to
understand what a typical week involves for the person with ADHD and how they go about organising themselves. They can then choose
one specific area that they would like to improve and, with the therapist, identify a tangible strategy to target this difficulty. For example,
being on time for work might involve setting several alarms and making lists the night before about what needs to be done in the morning.
Creating a task list and working systematically through this with a therapist can help clients with ADHD learn how to prioritise. For
example, they may give each task a high, medium or low priority, and then use these priority ratings to plan a sequence for task completion.
Asking open-ended questions about possible barriers to completion, anticipating difficulties, and planning ways to overcome these is very
important. This helps clients compensate for their impulsivity. When obstacles arise, rather than counterproductively acting on impulse,

they may implement constructive pre-planned solutions. For clients with ADHD sometimes tasks can seem too daunting or boring. Helping
clients to break these large unwieldy tasks down into more manageable parts is a useful skill to impart.
Reconceptualising time as a resource can be a good way of allowing clients to feel more in control of their lives. That is, they may helped
to recognise that 'time is my servant and I am not its slave.' It is important to stress that there also needs to be time management of time
management. That is, clients may be helped to appreciate that investing time in planning is likely to lead to better use of time in the long
term. Adults with ADHD are particularly vulnerable to time-wasting traps. Recognising time-wasting traps throughout the week may be
given as homework exercise. Common traps include: (1) attention switching (i.e. jumping from task to task); (2) delay aversion (i.e. opting
for immediate gratification rather than long-term reward); (3) procrastination (i.e. leaving it until tomorrow when it would be quicker to
complete it now); and (4) false busy-ness (i.e. seeming to be busy wandering around the office, but achieving nothing).
Distractibility Reduction
People with ADHD may be distracted by external stimuli or situations (e.g. noise) or internal stimuli (e.g. thoughts). Noticing distractibility is
the first step in helping to improve this difficulty. Therefore it can be helpful to ask clients to identify and record specific situations in which
they become distracted. Certain distraction cues may be in the environment. For example, people with ADHD may be distracted by desktop
icons on the computer, mobile phones or certain sounds. Reducing the likelihood of them being seen may help decrease distractibility.
Understanding what may be motivating distractibility can be critical in improving the problem. Distraction is often motivated by some sort
of avoidance. Where clients are overwhelmed by the magnitude of a project and wish to avoid it, they may engaging in a range of distracting
tasks. For example, in order to avoid studying, a client may surf the Internet. This is where the skills from organisation and planning can
be useful. Large unwieldy tasks (that are being avoided) may be broken down into a series of small manageable tasks. These may then be
prioritised. It is likely that if someone is having trouble getting started on a task, then the first step is too big, so it needs to be broken


down into smaller steps. For particularly boring or effortful activities, the client may benefit from developing a structured reward system to
support them.
Internal distractions from thoughts can often be problematic for people with ADHD. These are often related to avoidance of aversive
emotional states and associated negative automatic thoughts. Adults with ADHD may be more likely to respond to fleeting aversive states by
moving attention elsewhere or engaging in overly optimistic thinking (Knouse et al., 2013). Identifying patterns of internal distraction can
allow the examination of unhelpful thinking styles and provide a pathway to addressing these using more traditional CBT techniques. CBT
techniques for addressing cognitive distortions are described in Chapter 3.
Adaptive Thinking
The experience of a lifetime of ADHD is likely to include several situations that have involved failure, self-doubt, helplessness and
frustration. It is therefore not surprising that many adults with ADHD have developed thinking styles and behavioural patterns associated
with anxiety and depression (Mitchell et al., 2008). Cognitive restructuring can be beneficial by guiding clients to recognise unhelpful
negative thoughts and assumptions and gradually develop more realistic and helpful ways of thinking. Cognitive strategies used in CBT are
described in Chapter 3. Situations where the client has been procrastinating are often useful for eliciting negative thoughts and behavioural
patterns. For example, putting off applying for new jobs may reveal thoughts of inadequacy and fears of failure that can be challenged by
evaluating the evidence for the accuracy of the thoughts and correcting these.
Preparing for the Future
Given that ADHD is a chronic disorder, it can be difficult to identify a point at which to end therapy (Young & Bramham, 2007, 2013). It
is therefore important to clearly specify goals at the beginning of therapy, specify a duration for the therapy contract (e.g. 10-15 sessions)
and regularly review progress. Sometimes, it may be necessary to offer more sessions than were specified in the original contract in order


to firmly consolidate skills, and it may take a client longer to acquire skills. There is a risk that this may result in dependence on the
therapist, and the concept of ending therapy should be introduced early in treatment to avoid a situation in which the client feels isolated,
abandoned and without the confidence to apply the skills learned in therapy. The transition from therapy to autonomy needs to be planned
carefully with collaboration, for example, by reducing the frequency of sessions and/or conducting brief planned follow-ups in person or by
telephone.
Due to impulsive thinking styles, adults with ADHD have the potential to catastrophise when they anticipate or encounter future
difficulties. Motivational interviewing techniques are therefore useful for reframing problems as slips and lapses.
Planning for the future should involve making a plan for 'risk' situations and/or times when the client may feel vulnerable. By identifying
such times or situations, the client can consider appropriate coping mechanisms and plan to avoid responding impulsively. By thinking
through the consequences of proposed behaviour, clients may learn to cope better with or avoid challenging situations in the future.
Important Components of CBT Treatment for Adults with ADHD
Extra emphasis on certain aspects of CBT and some slight adaptations of traditional CBT can particularly help adults with ADHD. These
include goal setting, agendas, homework and rewards (see Young & Bramham, 2013).
Goal Setting
Clear, specific goals need to be established collaboratively at the onset of therapy. The process of attaining each specific goal needs to be
carefully broken down into stages. Clients are likely to require assistance in this task, as it may be difficult for them to see beyond one
overarching goal such as 'I want people to like me' or 'I want to succeed.' Goals should be reviewed regularly in order to maintain focus and
prevent the temptation to become sidetracked. Much as the client may wish to address multiple problems in one disorganised session, this is
unhelpful and will leave both the therapist and the client feeling dissatisfied.


Agendas
Agendas are a method of providing structure within each session and should be drawn up collaboratively. The therapist needs to adhere
closely to the agenda and not be distracted by 'crises' that may be presented by the client week by week. This will provide a model for clients
on how to deal with difficult situations in a rational and non-catastrophic manner. For example, an issue arising one week may be put on the
agenda for the subsequent session, by which point it may no longer be construed as such a difficult area. Over the course of treatment it is
preferable to cover a few (rather than many) skills and spend more time ensuring they are firmly embedded in clients' day-to-day lives. A few
consistently implemented skills are more likely to effect positive change than many poorly implemented skills.
Homework
Homework tasks are set at the end of each session. More so for adults with ADHD than other clients, the therapist needs to operationalise
exactly when and how clients will apply skills learned in therapy sessions in their day-to-day lives. Hypothetical discussions about possible
ways of using skills are not as helpful as planning exactly the specific situation and time when the client will need to try. It is important that
clients learn to take responsibility for rehearsing and endorsing techniques learned in sessions in an applied setting. Resistance to homework
tasks needs to be addressed and obstacles identified, anticipated and overcome by planning alternative strategies.
Rewards
Rewards are important for individuals with ADHD, as they find it difficult to delay gratification and tend to opt for a short-term smaller
rewards rather than wait for longer-term larger reinforcement (i.e. treatment gains). This feature of ADHD needs to be incorporated into
treatment so that individuals are rewarded regularly for attempting tasks, otherwise they are likely to lose interest in therapy and become
distracted. Motivation is also like to be variable at different points during therapy, and individuals may become bored with the repetition that
is likely to be required in order to consolidate new skills. Therefore building a reward system into homework can help to reduce avoidance,
such as scheduling pleasurable activities after completing challenging tasks.

Group CBT Treatment
Group CBT treatment for ADHD has been shown to be beneficial and is particularly cost-effective (Solanto, 2011). Groups can also serve a
supportive function given that people with ADHD have often never met anyone else with the disorder and have always felt different than
'normal' people. Group CBT can allow them to benefit from hearing about others' experiences and ways of coping with similar symptoms
(Bramham et al., 2009). Many of the techniques for individuals with ADHD can be adapted for presentation in a group setting.
Other Psychological Treatment Approaches
ADHD Coaching
Changes to the environment around adults with ADHD can make a huge difference to their level of functional impairment. Indeed, many
individuals already make these adaptations in their choice of work, or have found through trial and error what suits them and optimises
their functioning. For example, adults with ADHD may select work environments where distractions are minimised and executive or
organisational demands are reduced. A substantial proportion of adults with ADHD find that being self-employed allows them to have the
flexibility they need to be productive. However, others prefer having some structure organised for them and being given deadlines to work
towards. People living and working with individuals with ADHD such as partners, family members, employers and colleagues can be advised
on how best to support the person by accommodating their difficulties and increasing routine and scheduling.
ADHD coaching has been developed as a form of life coaching and particularly focuses on goal setting and problem solving (Hallowell &
Ratey, 1994). The coach helps the individual to build motivation and methods of reward to allow them to make changes in daily life. There
is limited research regarding the efficacy of ADHD coaching specifically (e.g. Swartz et al., 2005; Zwart & Kallemeyn, 2001), but its main
components are very similar to those used in CBT where there is now an increasing evidence base.


Mindfulness for Adults with ADHD
There has been increasing interest in the applicability of mindfulness techniques in ADHD and a growing evidence base from treatment
trials with adults (e.g. Schoenberg et al., 2014; Zylowska et al., 2008, 2009). It makes intuitive sense given the focus on attention training and
awareness, and also given that it provides a way of addressing some of the emotion-regulation difficulties that are often seen in the context
of ADHD. Mitchell et al. (2015) have developed the Mindful Awareness Practices (MAPs) for adults with ADHD.
The MAPs for ADHD programme involves an 8-week course of mindfulness training sessions with each session 2.5 hours long. Many
of the traditional mindfulness exercises have been adapted for people with ADHD by shortening the duration or by using walking rather
than sitting meditations. The key topics covered in sessions include introduction to mindfulness; mindful awareness of ADHD patterns;
mindful awareness of breath, body and sound; mindful awareness of body sensations; mindful awareness of thoughts; mindful awareness
of emotions; mindful awareness of interactions; and review. Details regarding the administration of this programme and case examples are
provided in Mitchell et al. (2015).
Dialectical Behavioural Therapy (DBT) and ADHD
A well-recognised clinical feature of ADHD is emotional dysregulation and disinhibited behaviour. Therefore, ADHD seems to share
considerable symptoms with borderline personality disorder, particularly in terms of impulsivity and emotional instability, as well as
disturbed interpersonal relationships and substance abuse (Matthies & Philipsen, 2014). Dialectical behavioural therapy (DBT) is a well-
established empirically supported treatment for borderline personality disorder, described in Chapter 27. DBT-informed group-based
interventions for adults with ADHD have been shown to be effective (Hesslinger et al., 2002; Hirvikoski et al., 2011; Philipsen et al., 2007,
2010). The intervention includes skills modules such as mindfulness, 'chaos and control' organisational strategies, emotion regulation,
stress management, substance use and self-respect. The rationale for each of these skills modules is to teach individuals to focus attention,

and to accept and survive challenging life events without behaving impulsively. The overarching aim is to teach individuals to self-appraise
their own behaviour patterns and their associated thoughts, feelings and actions that contribute to impulsive and problematic behaviours.
Families and ADHD
Given the extremely high heritability of ADHD, it is likely that adults with ADHD will have children with ADHD. This shared diagnosis
can lead to greater understanding of a child with ADHD and potentially mean that the parent is more sympathetic and accommodating.
However, it also can be very difficult for an adult with ADHD to be a parent, which often requires paying attention to details (e.g. not letting
a child out of sight), organisational skills (coordinating play dates, homework, etc.), listening carefully and sustaining attention in tedious
situations. Parenting skills courses that are adapted for children with ADHD often have to take into account that some parents will have the
disorder themselves.
Summary
ADHD is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders and is characterised by inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity. The
validity of the diagnosis of ADHD in adulthood is supported by research from genetic, neuroimaging, neuropsychology and clinical studies.
More than half of children diagnosed with ADHD continue to meet diagnostic criteria in adulthood. The majority of adults with ADHD
present either with the combined or inattentive ADHD subtypes. International prevalence studies show that 3.4% of adults have ADHD, and
only 14% have a single diagnosis. The most common comorbidities are anxiety, depression or dysthymia, bipolar disorder, personality
disorders and substance use disorders. Genetic factors, prenatal and perinatal adversity, dysregulation of the dopaminergic and the
noradrenergic neurotransmission systems, and severe early deprivation have all been implicated in the aetiology of ADHD. Assessment of
adult ADHD should be conducted by a multidisciplinary team and include a full physical examination (with particular attention to cardiac
functioning because of the implications of cardiac difficulties for treatment with stimulants) and a comprehensive psychological

assessment. Psychological assessment should include a clinical interview with the client, a clinical interview with a parent or informant
about childhood behaviour, administration of standardised measures including neuropsychological tests and rating scales, and review of
school reports or occupational assessments. Formulation can be structured around the presence of childhood ADHD, the continuance of this
as adult ADHD, and the presence of comorbidities or differential diagnosis (with some explanation of how these are likely to have arisen).
Predisposing factors may include family history, prenatal and perinatal problems, and adverse early environments. Maintaining factors may
include maladaptive coping strategies. Protective factors may include flexible employment and family support. For adult ADHD multimodal
interventions, incorporating both medication and psychological treatments are recommended. Medications include stimulants such as
methylphenidate and non-stimulants such as atomoxetine for those who do not respond to stimulants. Psychological intervention,
especially CBT, is appropriate for most adults with ADHD, but may be particularly appropriate for individuals who do not respond to
medication or prefer not to receive pharmacological treatment, as well as those who present with complex comorbidities or difficulties
associated with ADHD.
Skills Building Exercises for Professionals in Training
1. Undiagnosed ADHD. Consider previous clients with whom you have worked. Maybe some of them could have had ADHD. Sometimes
when working with clients with ADHD, professionals can feel daunted or as though it will be a completely unfamiliar situation.
However, given the prevalence and comorbidity rates in ADHD, it is highly likely that you will have already encountered several
individuals with ADHD both professionally or outside work.
2. Experiential exercise. As a behavioural experiment, leave your diary and phone at home one day. This will allow you to recognise how
much of day-to-day functioning depends on external aids but also on the ability to remember to use them. Reflect on how this makes


you feel when you are unsure of where you are supposed to be, what you need to bring and the feelings of inadequacy which accompany
these experiences.
Further reading for Professionals
Barkley, R. A. (Ed.). (2015). Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. A Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment (Fourth Edition). New York:
Guilford Press.
Mitchell, J. T., Nelson-Gray, R. O., & Anastopoulos, A. D. (2008). Adapting an emerging empirically supported cognitive-behavioural
therapy for adults with ADHD and comorbid complications: An example of two case studies. Clinical Case Studies, 7, 423-448.
Mitchell, J. T., Zylowska, L., & Kollins, S. H. (2015). Mindfulness meditation training for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in
adulthood: Current empirical support, treatment overview, and future directions. Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 22(2), 172-191.
Ramsay, J. R., & Rostain, A. (2008). Therapy for Adult ADHD: An Integrative Psychosocial and Medical Approach. Oxford, UK: Routledge.
Solanto, M. V. (2011). Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for Adult ADHD: Targeting Executive Dysfunction. New York: Guilford.
Sprich, S. E., Knouse, L. E., Cooper-Vince, C., Burbridge, J., & Safren, S. A. (2010). Description and demonstration of CBT for ADHD in
adults. Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 17, 9-15. [Includes link to online videos of role-plays demonstrating strategies]
Surman, C. B. (2013). ADHD in Adults: A Practical Guide to Evaluation and Management. New York: Springer.
Young, S., & Bramham, H. (2013). Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for ADHD in Adolescents and Adults: A Psychological Guide to Practice
(Second Edition). Chichester: Wiley.


Further reading for Clients
Hallowell, E. M., & Ratey, J. J. (1995). Driven to Distraction: Recognizing and Coping with Attention Deficit Disorder from Childhood Through
Adulthood. New York: First Touchstone.
Safren, S., Sprich, S., Perlman, C. A., & Otto, M. W. (2005). Mastering Your Adult ADHD: A Cognitive- Behavioural Treatment Program, Client
Workbook. New York: Oxford University Press.
Assessment Instruments
Adler, L. A., Kessler, R. C., & Spencer, T. (2003). Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale-v1. 1 (ASRS-v1. 1) Symptom Checklist. New York: World
Health Organization.
Barkley, R. A. (2011). Barkley adult ADHD rating scale-IV (BAARS-IV). New York: Guilford.
Brown, T. E. (1996). Brown Attention-Deficit Disorder Scales. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Conners, C. K., Epstein, J., & Johnson, D. E. (2001). Conner's Adult ADHD Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV: CAADID. New York: MHS.
Conners, C. K., Erhardt, D., Epstein, J. N., Parker, J., Sitarenios, G., & Sparrow, E. (1999). Self-ratings of ADHD symptoms in adults I: Factor
structure and normative data. Journal of Attention Disorders, 3(3), 141-151.
Epstein, J., & Johnson, D (2001). Conners' Adult ADHD Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV. North Tonawanda: Multi-Health Systems.
Kooij, J.J.S., & Francken, M. H. (2010). Diagnostic Interview for ADHD in Adults 2.0 (DIVA 2.0). Adult ADHD. Diagnostic Assessment and
Treatment. Amsterdam, Netherland: Pearson Assessment and Information BV.


Ward, M. F., Wender, P. H., & Reimherr, F. W. (1993). The Wender Utah Rating Scale: an aid in the retrospective diagnosis of childhood
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 885-890.

References

Aagaard, L., & Hansen, E. (2013). Adverse drug reactions reported by consumers for nervous system medications in Europe 2007 to
2011. BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology, 14, 30.
Adler, L. A., Kessler, R. C., & Spencer, T. (2003). Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale-v1. 1 (ASRS-v1. 1) Symptom Checklist. New York: World
Health Organization.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1980). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Third Edition (DSM-III). Arlington,
VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Fourth Edition (DSM-IV).
Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Anckarsäter, H., Stahlberg, O., Larson, T., Hakansson, C., Jutblad, S., Niklasson, L., ... Rastam, M. (2006). The impact of ADHD and autism
spectrum disorders on temperament, character, and personality development. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(7), 1239-1244.
Arnsten, C. F. (2006). Fundamentals of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: circuits and pathways. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67
(Suppl.), 7-12.
Barkley, R. A. (2011). Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale-IV (BAARS-IV). New York: Guilford.


Barkley, R. A. (Ed.). (2015). Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. A Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment (Fourth Edition). New York:
Guilford Press.
Barkley, R. A., Fischer, M., Smallish, L., & Fletcher, K. (2002). The persistence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder into young
adulthood as a function of reporting source and definition of disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 279-289.
Barkley, R. A., & Murphy, K. R. (1998). Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. A Clinical Workbook. New York: Guilford.
Bernardi, S., Faraone, S. V., Cortese, S., Kerridge, B. T., Pallanti, S., Wang, S., & Blanco, C. (2012). The lifetime impact of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder: Results from the national epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related conditions (NESARC). Psychological
Medicine, 42(4), 875-887.
Biederman, J., Mick, E., & Faraone, S. V. (2000). Age-dependent decline of symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Impact of
remission definition and symptom type. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157(5), 816-818.
Biederman, J., Mick, E., Faraone, S., Braaten, E., Doyle, A., Spencer, T., ... Johnson, M. A. (2002). Influence of gender on attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder in children referred to a psychiatric clinic. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 36-42.
Biederman, J., Milberger, S., Faraone, S. V., Kiely, K., Guite, J., Mick, E., ... Reed, E. (1995). Family- environment risk factors for attention-
deficit hyperactivity disorder: a test of Rutter's indicators of adversity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52(6), 464-470.
Bloom, D. R., Levin, H. S., Ewing-Cobbs, L., Saunders, A. E., Song, J., Fletcher, J. M., & Kowatch, R. A. (2001). Lifetime and novel psychiatric
disorders after paediatric traumatic brain injury. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40(5), 572-579.
Bramham, J., Murphy, D.G.M., Xenitidis, K., Asherson, P. A., Hopkin, G., Young, S. (2012). Adults with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder: an investigation of age-related differences in behavioural symptoms, neuropsychological function and comorbidity.
Psychological Medicine, 42, 2225-2234.
Bramham, J., Young, S., Bickerdike, A., Spain, D., McCartan, D., & Xenitidis, K. (2009). Evaluation of group cognitive behavioural therapy
for adults with ADHD. Journal of Attention Disorders, 12, 434-441.


Brown, T. E. (1996). Brown Attention Deficit Disorders Scales. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Clarke, L., Ungerer, J., Chahoud, K., Johnson, S., & Stiefel, I. (2002). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder is associated with attachment
insecurity. Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 7(2), 179-198.
Clements, S. D. (1966). The child with minimal brain dysfunction. A multidisciplinary catalyst. Lancet, 86(3), 121-123.
Conners, C. K., Erhardt, D., Epstein, J. N., Parker, J., Sitarenios, G., & Sparrow, E. (1999). Self-ratings of ADHD symptoms in adults I: Factor
structure and normative data. Journal of Attention Disorders, 3(3), 141-151.
Conners, C. K., Epstein, J., & Johnson, D. E. (2001). Conner's Adult ADHD Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV: CAADID. New York: MHS.
Faraone, S., Biederman, J., & Mick, E. (2006). The age dependent decline of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A meta-analysis of
follow-up studies. Psychological Medicine, 36, 159-165.
Faraone, S. V., & Doyle, A. E. (2001). The nature and heritability of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 10(2), 299-316.
Fayyad, J., De Graaf, R., Kessler, R., Alonso, J., Angermeyer, M., Demyttenaere, K., & Jin, R. (2007). Cross-national prevalence and
correlates of adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 190(5), 402-409.
Fischer, M., Barkley, R. A., Smallish, L., & Fletcher, K. (2007). Hyperactive children as young adults: driving abilities, safe driving
behaviour, and adverse driving outcomes. Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 39(1), 94-105.
Friedrichs, B., Igl, W., Larsson, H., & Larsson, J. O. (2012). Coexisting psychiatric problems and stressful life events in adults with
symptoms of ADHD-A large Swedish population-based study of twins. Journal of Attention Disorders, 16(1), 13–22.
Grogan, K., & Bramham, J. (2015). An investigation of the accuracy of retrospective self-reports of childhood ADHD symptoms in an
adult ADHD sample in comparison with a non-ADHD sample. Cork Journal of Applied Psychology, 1, 1-13.
Hallowell, E.M, & Ratey, J. J. (1994). Driven To Distraction: Recognizing and Coping with Attention Deficit Disorder from Childhood Through
Adulthood. New York: Touchstone Press.

Hart, E. L., Lahey, B. B., Loeber, R., Applegate, B., & Frick, P. J. (1995). Developmental change in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in
boys: a four-year longitudinal study. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 23(6), 729-749.
Hervey, A. S., Epstein, J. N., & Curry, J. F. (2004). Neuropsychology of adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a meta-
analytic review. Neuropsychology, 18(3), 485-503.
Hesslinger, B., Tebartz van Elst, L., Nyberg, E., Dykierek, P., Richter, H., Berner, M., et al. (2002). Psychotherapy of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder in adults-a pilot study using a structured skills training program. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience, 252, 177-184.
Hirvikoski, T., Waaler, E., Alfredsson, J., Pihlgren, C., Holmström, A., Johnson, A., ... & Nordström, A. L. (2011). Reduced ADHD symptoms
in adults with ADHD after structured skills training group: results from a randomized controlled trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
49(3), 175-185.
Kessler, R. C., Adler, L., Barkley, R., Biederman, J., Conners, C. K., Demler, O., ... Zaslavsky, A. M. (2006). The prevalence and correlates of
adult ADHD in the United States: results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(4), 716-
723.
Knouse, L. E. (2015). Cognitive-behavioural therapies for ADHD. In R. A. Barkley (Ed.), Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. A
Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment (Fourth Edition, pp. 757-773). New York: Guilford.
Knouse, L. E., Zvorsky, I., & Safren, S. A. (2013). Depression in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): The
mediating role of cognitive-behavioural factors. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 37(6), 1220-1232.
Koemans, R. G., van Vroenhoven, S., Karreman, A., & Bekker, M. H. (2015). Attachment and autonomy problems in adults with ADHD.
Journal of Attention Disorders, 19(5), 435-446.
Kooij, J.J.S., & Francken, M. H. (2010). Diagnostic Interview for ADHD in Adults 2.0 (DIVA 2.0). Adult ADHD. Diagnostic Assessment and
Treatment. Amsterdam: Pearson Assessment and Information BV.


Kreppner, J. M., O'Connor, T. G., Rutter, M., & English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team. (2001). Can inattention/overactivity be an
institutional deprivation syndrome? Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 29(6), 513-528.
Lara, C., Fayyad, J., De Graaf, R., Kessler, R. C., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Angermeyer, M., ... Sampson, N. (2009). Childhood predictors of adult
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: results from the World Health Organization World Mental Health Survey Initiative. Biological
Psychiatry, 65(1), 46-54.
Levy, F. (1991). The dopamine theory of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 25(2), 277-283.
Linnet, K. M., Dalsgaard, S., Obel, C., Wisborg, K., Henriksen, T. B., Rodriguez, A., ... Jarvelin, M. R. (2003). Maternal lifestyle factors in
pregnancy risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and associated behaviours: review of the current evidence. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 160(6), 1028-1040.
Lou, H. C., Rosa, P., Pryds, O., Karrebæk, H., Lunding, J., Cumming, P., & Gjedde, A. (2004). ADHD: increased dopamine receptor
availability linked to attention deficit and low neonatal cerebral blood flow. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 46(03), 179-183.
Mannuzza, S., Klein, R. G., Konig, P. H., & Giampino, T. L. (1989). Hyperactive boys almost grown up, IV: criminality and its relationship
to psychiatric status. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46, 1073-1079.
Matthies, S. D., & Philipsen, A. (2014). Common ground in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Borderline Personality
Disorder (BPD)-Review of recent findings. Borderline Personality Disorder and Emotion Dysregulation, 1(1), 3-16.
Max, J. E., Mathews, K., Manes, F. F., Robertson, B. A., Fox, P. T., Lancaster, J. L., ... Collings, N. (2003). Attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder and neurocognitive correlates after childhood stroke. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 9, 815-829.
Michelson, D., Adler, L., Spencer, T., Reimherr, F. W., West, S. A., Allen, A. J., ... Milton, D. (2003). Atomoxetine in adults with ADHD: two
randomized, placebo-controlled studies. Biological Psychiatry, 53(2), 112-120.


Milberger, S., Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Chen, L., & Jones, J. (1997). ADHD is associated with early initiation of cigarette smoking in
children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 36(1), 37-44.
Millstein, R. B., Wilens, T. E., Biederman, J., & Spencer, T. J. (1997). Presenting ADHD symptoms and subtypes in clinically referred adults
with ADHD. Journal of Attentional Disorders, 2(3), 159-166.
Mitchell, J. T., Nelson-Gray, R. O., & Anastopoulos, A. D. (2008). Adapting an emerging empirically supported cognitive-behavioural
therapy for adults with ADHD and comorbid complications. An example of two case studies. Clinical Case Studies, 7(5), 423-448.
Mitchell, J. T., Zylowska, L., & Kollins, S. H. (2015). Mindfulness meditation training for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in
adulthood: Current empirical support, treatment overview, and future directions. Cognitive and Behavioural Practice, 22(2), 172-191.
Mongia, M., & Hechtman, L. (2012). Cognitive behaviour therapy for adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a review of
recent randomized controlled trials. Current Psychiatry Reports, 14(5), 561-567.
Neuman, R. J., Lobos, E., Reich, W., Henderson, C. A., Sun, L. W., & Todd, R. D. (2007). Prenatal smoking exposure and dopaminergic
genotypes interact to cause a severe ADHD subtype. Biological Psychiatry, 61(12), 1320-1328.
NICE. (2013). Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder-Diagnosis and Management of ADHD in Children, Young People and Adults (Clinical
Guideline No 72). London: Author.
Nissen, S. E. (2006). ADHD drugs and cardiovascular risk. New England Journal of Medicine, 354 (14), 1445-1448.
Philipsen, A., Graf, E., van Elst, L. T., Jans, T., Warnke, A., Hesslinger, B., & Berger, M. (2010). Evaluation of the efficacy and effectiveness
of a structured disorder tailored psychotherapy in ADHD in adults: study protocol of a randomized controlled multicentre trial. ADHD
Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorders, 2(4), 203-212.
Philipsen, A., Richter, H., Peters, J., Alm, B., Sobanski, E., Colla, M., & Hesslinger, B. (2007). Structured group psychotherapy in adults with
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: results of an open multicentre study. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 195(12), 1013-
1019.


Polanczyk, G., de Lima, M. S., Horta, B. L., Biederman, J., & Rohde, L. A. (2007). The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a systematic review
and metaregression analysis. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 164(6), 942-948.
Prince, J., Wilens, T. Spencer, T., & Biederman, J. (2015). Pharmacotherapy of ADHD in adults. In R. A. Barkley (Ed.), Attention-Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder: A Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment (Fourth Edition, pp. 826-860). New York: Guilford.
Rasmussen, P., & Gilberg, C. (2000). Natural outcome of ADHD with developmental coordination disorder at age 22 years: A controlled,
longitudinal, community-based study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 1424-1431.
Rietveld, M. J., Hudziak, J. J., Bartels, M., Van Beijsterveldt, C.E.M., & Boomsma, D. I. (2003). Heritability of attention problems in children:
I. Cross-sectional results from a study of twins, age 3-12 years. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics,
117(1), 102-113.
Rösler, M., Retz, W., Thome, J., Schneider, M., Stieglitz, R., & Falkai, P. (2006). Psychopathological rating scales for diagnostic use in adults
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 256, 3–11.
Sachs, G. S., Baldassano, C. F., Truman, C. J., & Guille, C. (2000). Comorbidity of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder with early- and
late-onset bipolar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 466-468.
Schoechlin, C., & Engel, R. R. (2005). Neuropsychological performance in adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: Meta-analysis of
empirical data. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 20(6), 727-744.
Schoenberg, P. L., Hepark, S., Kan, C. C., Barendregt, H. P., Buitelaar, J. K., & Speckens, A. E. (2014). Effects of mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy on neurophysiological correlates of performance monitoring in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 125(7), 1407-1416.
Solanto, M. V. (2011). Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for Adult ADHD: Targeting Executive Dysfunction. New York: Guilford.


Spencer, T., Wilens, T., Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Ablon, J. S., & Lapey, K. (1995). A double-blind, crossover comparison of
methylphenidate and placebo in adults with childhood-onset attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry,
52(6), 434-443.
Steinhausen, H. C., Nøvik, T. S., Baldursson, G., Curatolo, P., Lorenzo, M. J., Pereira, R. R., ... Rothenberger, A. (2006). Co-existing
psychiatric problems in ADHD in the ADORE cohort. European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 15(1), 125-129.
Sullivan, M. A., & Rudwick-Levin, F. (2001). Attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder and substance abuse: Diagnostic and
therapeutic considerations. Adult Attention Deficit Disorder: Brain Mechanisms and Life Outcomes, 931, 251-270.
Swartz, S. L., Prevatt, F., & Proctor, B. E. (2005). A coaching intervention for college students with attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Psychology in the Schools, 42(6), 647-656.
Thapar, A., Cooper, M., Eyre, O., & Langley, K. (2013). Practitioner review: What have we learnt about the causes of ADHD? Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 3-16.
Ward, M. F., Wender, P. H., & Reimherr, F. W. (1993). The Wender Utah Rating Scale: an aid in the retrospective diagnosis of childhood
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 885-890.
Wechsler, D. (2008). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Third Edition (WAIS-IV). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Wechsler, D. (2010). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Third Edition (WAIS-IV-UK). Oxford, UK: Pearson.
Wender, P. H., Wolf, L. E., & Wasserstein, J. (2001). Adults with ADHD. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 931(1), 1-16.
Wilens, T. E., & Dodson, W. (2004). A clinical perspective of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder into adulthood. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 65(10), 1301-1313.
Woods, S. P., Lovejoy, D. W., & Ball, J. D. (2002). Neuropsychological characteristics of adults with ADHD: a comprehensive review of
initial studies. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 16(1), 12-34.


World Health Organization (WHO). (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and
Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
Wozniak, J., Biederman, J., Kiely, K., Ablon, J. S., Faraone, S. V., Mundy, E., & Mennin, D. (1995). Mania-like symptoms suggestive of
childhood-onset bipolar disorder in clinically referred children. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 34,
867-876.
Young, S., & Bramham, H. (2013). Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy for ADHD in Adolescents and Adults: A Psychological Guide to Practice
(Second Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
Young, S., & Bramham, J. (2007). ADHD in Adults: A Psychological Guide to Practice. Sussex, UK: Wiley.
Zwart, L. M., & Kallemeyn, L. M. (2001). Peer-based coaching for college students with ADHD and learning disabilities. Journal of
Postsecondary Education and Disability, 15(1), 1–15.
Zylowska, L., Ackerman, D. L., Yang, M. H., Futrell, J. L., Horton, N. L., Hale, T. S., ... Smalley, S. L. (2008). Mindfulness meditation training
in adults and adolescents with ADHD a feasibility study. Journal of Attention Disorders, 11(6), 737-746.
Zylowska, L., Smalley, S. L., & Schwartz, J. M. (2009). Mindful awareness and ADHD. In F. Didonna (Ed.), Clinical Handbook of Mindfulness
(pp. 319-338). New York: Springer.


Chapter 24 Alcohol and Other Drug Problems
Alex Copello, Majid Mahmood and Edward Day
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-24
Case Study
Danielle is a 45-year-old woman referred to a specialist treatment service by her general practitioner (GP). She feels that she has had a
problem with alcohol since the age of 10, but recent health-related problems have convinced her of the need to seek professional help to stop
drinking.
Danielle's father drank heavily and was often violent to her mother when she was young. He left the family home when Danielle was 5
years old, and her mother suffered with severe bouts of low mood and anxiety. Danielle never felt close to her mother, and she was often left
in the house to manage on her own. She was close to her mum's older brother Tony, who was a constant source of support throughout her
early life.
Danielle was shy and withdrawn at school, and found it hard to make friends. However, she obtained some basic level qualifications, and
had been continuously employed in a variety of jobs throughout her life. She met her husband Steve whilst working in a factory, and they had

been married for over 20 years. They have three children: Amy (aged 14), Matthew (16) and Robert (18). Danielle took pride in the fact that
she had always taken her duties as a wife and mother seriously, not drinking alcohol at all during any of the pregnancies, and never drinking
in front of her family.
Danielle had her first alcoholic drink at the age of 10. Left alone in the house she experimented by 'making cocktails' with drinks in her
mother's drinks cabinet, and found that she liked the sense of 'warmth and relaxation' that drinking alcohol gave her. She was drinking
vodka and brandy mixed with cola at home, and by the time she was 15 she was even taking alcohol into school to drink. Throughout most
of her life she felt she could control her alcohol consumption, remaining sober at important times. She had never lost a job through drinking,
and was sure that her family were unaware of her drinking behaviour. However, she had gradually begun to realise that she was experiencing
increasingly frequent episodes of 'total loss of control'.
Three years prior to the initial assessment she had consumed a full 750 ml bottle of vodka (30 units of alcohol) at home on her own one
evening. While putting the rubbish bins out at the front of the house Danielle had collapsed, and was later told by a neighbour that she was
'having a fit'. An ambulance was called, and she was kept overnight in hospital because the medical team were very concerned about the high
levels of alcohol in her bloodstream.
This episode was the first time her husband Steve had witnessed the extent of her drinking, and she revealed over 20 empty bottles of
vodka hidden around the house. She was surprised to learn that her three children were all aware that she drank heavily at times, and had
learned to keep out of her way when they returned from school and sensed she had been drinking. The family was supportive, although
Danielle's embarrassment prevented her from talking about it more than she had to.
At this point Danielle had visited her GP, who suggested stopping drinking altogether. She had followed this advice for several weeks, but
one day while doing her shopping Danielle saw a bottle of vodka on the shelf in the supermarket. She was immediately overcome by an
intense desire to drink alcohol, and the vodka looked like 'liquid gold'. She bought it, and had consumed the entire bottle within 4 hours,


later forgetting to collect her daughter from school. This overwhelming desire to drink frightened her, and she couldn't understand why she
hadn't resisted this sudden craving to drink.
Danielle had experienced the deaths of her mother and two close friends in the past few years and described feeling low and 'alone in the
world'. Her sleep had become erratic, and she would drink wine in the evening to 'knock herself out'. She was often tearful 'for no reason',
and described two episodes of intense anxiety where she experienced a racing heart, shortness of breath and a sensation that she was
suffocating. She was intensely embarrassed by her inability to control her drinking, but said that she couldn't imagine life without it.
Following referral to the addiction service, Danielle embarked on a course of individual sessions that initially focused on motivational
work, establishing Danielle's perceived advantages and disadvantages of continued drinking and exploring her motivation to change. This
was followed by some joint work with Steve and Danielle based on social behaviour and network therapy to develop strategies to maintain
her change in drinking and avoid the risk of relapse in the future. Danielle's treatment package was agreed and negotiated at various stages
of the contact with the therapist.

Introduction
Alcohol and other substance misuse problems are highly prevalent and present some significant challenges to those offering help. However,
working with this population provides an invaluable opportunity for clinical psychologists to use high-level clinical awareness, formulation
and treatment skills within an empathic and non-judgemental therapeutic relationship. Each client walking through the door will present a
unique combination of factors that have led to their presenting problems, and the clinical psychologist is in a good position to make sense of
the presentation and develop an evidence-based treatment plan in conjunction with the client and a multidisciplinary team. The case study
of Danielle will be used at various stages of this chapter to illustrate the strategies that are part of the different treatment approaches.


A number of ways of classifying alcohol and other drug problems are available and widely used in health care settings. It is important
to be familiar with the most common classifications and diagnostic terms as these are used for communication between professionals and
clients. It is also important to be familiar with the physical impact of addictive substances in order to decide if, for example, medically
assisted withdrawal is required before psychological work can proceed, or to help clients interpret some of their physical symptoms. While
diagnoses are widely used, they are still the focus of debate in terms of key concepts (e.g. abuse versus dependence, salience of biological
versus psychological factors) and some of the more established classification methods have been critically appraised from a psychological
perspective. Validated questionnaires are commonly used in the alcohol and drug field, and examples of such measures are suggested
throughout the chapter.
The focus of this chapter will be mainly oriented towards alcohol problems, although there is also ample information on illicit drugs and
the psychological interventions described can be used with both presenting problems. Increasingly it is being recognised that other forms of
behavioural patterns resemble those of substance-related addictions. A full discussion is beyond the scope of this chapter, but it is important
to note that in future some of the areas and treatments covered may be broadened and have relevance to other behavioural addictions (e.g.
gambling).
Clinical Features and Diagnosis
For such a small and simple molecule, alcohol produces a complex array of psychoactive effects which have led to it being valued by humans
for over 2,000 years. It has held a central role in religious, cultural and social practices in most societies, but as alcohol production has
become increasingly sophisticated in industrialised nations, the harm associated with increasing consumption has become more apparent.
There are two main ways that health professionals think about psychoactive substance use and its associated harms. These are referred
to as the dimensional or spectrum approach, and the diagnostic category approach. If we consider the use of alcohol, it can readily be


conceptualised across a spectrum. A proportion of the population will abstain completely from alcohol, for a variety of religious, health
or personal reasons. The majority report consuming alcohol at levels which produce the desired effects with few problems. However, a
proportion will experience harms of increasing severity, with as many as 1 in 20 experiencing an 'addiction' to alcohol, whereby their ability
to control the frequency and extent of their consumption becomes eroded.
Although this spectrum is very helpful in planning prevention and treatment strategies at a population level, clinicians and researchers
may also find that the use of diagnostic categories of disorder can facilitate decision making and efficient communication. The World Health
Organization (2014) describes three categories: hazardous drinking, harmful drinking, and alcohol dependence.
• Hazardous drinking: drinking above recognised 'sensible' levels but not yet experiencing harm (21 units/week for men, 14 units/week for
women in the UK, where a 'unit of alcohol' has a standard definition – see http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/alcohol/Pages/alcohol-units.aspx).
• Harmful drinking: drinking above 'sensible' levels and experiencing damage to health. The damage may be physical (e.g. hepatitis)
or mental (e.g. depressive episodes secondary to heavy alcohol intake). Harmful use commonly, but not invariably, has adverse social
consequences.
• Alcohol dependence: drinking above 'sensible' levels and experiencing harm and symptoms of dependence. The dependence syndrome
was first described by Edwards and Gross in 1976, outlining a repeated clustering of signs and symptoms in heavy drinkers (Edwards
& Gross, 1976). They described how the progression of an alcohol problem may be accompanied by a narrowing of the repertoire of
drinking (i.e. focusing on cheap, high alcohol drinks), and a progressive neglect of other important activities in life in favour of drinking
('salience of drinking'). This is often accompanied by increased tolerance to alcohol (i.e. needing more alcohol to get the same effect), and a
characteristic set of withdrawal symptoms when blood levels of alcohol fall. This in turn leads to relief or avoidance of further withdrawal
symptoms by further drinking. However, perhaps the key feature was a subjective awareness of a drive or 'craving' to drink, and a steady
eroding of the ability to control alcohol consumption once started.


The International Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders (ICD-10, WHO, 1992) provides diagnostic criteria and rules for
their application in making diagnoses; these are given in Table 24.1. The ICD-10 diagnostic category of harmful use is less well defined
when compared to the dependence syndrome. Both ICD-10, a WHO international diagnostic system (WHO, 1992), and the parallel North
American system (the Diagnostic & Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM-IV-TR; APA, 2000) that was used up until 2013 placed
dependence above harmful use (or 'abuse' in DSM) in a hierarchy by specifying that harmful use/abuse should not be diagnosed when
dependence was present. However, a variety of technical reasons (summarised by Hasin et al. (2013)) have led the authors of the latest
version of the DSM (DSM-5) to adopt a different approach (APA, 2013). The categories of abuse and dependence have been removed, and
replaced with a single diagnosis of alcohol use disorder, which has different levels of severity depending on the number of criteria present, as
shown in Table 24.2. This is closer to the spectrum of disorder approach outlined earlier. The criteria used in the ICD-10, DSM-IV and DSM-5
diagnostic systems are summarised in Table 24.3.
Table 24.1 The ICD-10 Criteria for Harmful use and Dependence
Harmful Use
A pattern of alcohol or psychoactive substance abuse that is causing harm to health.
The damage may be physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected drugs) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive
disorder secondary to heavy consumption of alcohol).
The fact that pattern of use of alcohol or a particular substance is disapproved of by a culture or may have led to socially negative
consequences, such as arrest or marital arguments is not in itself evidence of harmful use.
Dependence Syndrome
A cluster of physiological, behavioural and cognitive phenomena in which the use of alcohol or a substance or a class of substances takes
on a much higher priority than other behaviours that once had greater value.

A definite diagnosis of dependence should usually be made only if three or more of the following have been present together at the same
time during the previous year:
a. a strong desire or sense of compulsion to drink alcohol
b. difficulties in controlling drinking behaviour in terms of its onset, termination, or levels of consumption
c. a physiological withdrawal state when drinking has ceased or been reduced, as evidenced by: the characteristic alcohol withdrawal
syndrome; or use of the same (or a closely related) substance with the intention of relieving or avoiding withdrawal symptoms e.g.
benzodiazepines
d. evidence of tolerance, such that increased quantities of alcohol are required in order to achieve the effects originally produced by
lesser amounts
e. progressive neglect of alternative pleasures or interests because of alcohol consumption, increased amount of time necessary to
obtain or drink alcohol or to recover from its effects
f. persisting with drinking alcohol despite clear evidence of overtly harmful consequences, such as harm to the liver, depressive mood
states, or impaired cognitive functioning; efforts should be made to determine that the drinker was actually, or could be expected to
be, aware of the nature and extent of the harm.
Narrowing of the personal repertoire of patterns of drinking has also been described as a characteristic feature e.g. a tendency to drink
alcoholic drinks in the same way on weekdays and weekends, regardless of social constraints that determine appropriate drinking
behaviour.
It is an essential characteristic of the dependence syndrome that either alcohol consumption or a desire to drink alcohol is present; the
subjective awareness of compulsion to drink alcohol is most commonly seen during attempts to stop or control substance use.
Note: Adapted from ICD-10 (WHO, 1992)

Table 24.2 The DSM-5 Criteria for Alcohol use Disorder
A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following,
occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control alcohol use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain alcohol, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.
5. Recurrent alcohol use resulting in a failure to fulfil major role obligations at work, school or home.
6. Continued alcohol use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of
alcohol.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced because of alcohol use.
8. Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have
been caused or exacerbated by alcohol.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxication or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of alcohol.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:


a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol ((refer to Criteria A and B of the criteria set for alcohol withdrawal, pp. 499–
500 of DSM-5).
b. Alcohol (or a closely related substance, such as a benzodiazepine) is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Specify current severity:
305.00 (F10.10) Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
303.90 (F10.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
303.90 (F10.20) Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
For other specifiers see DSM-5 р. 491.
Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association.

Co-Occurring Physical and Mental Health Problems and Social Factors
Substance use is associated with a wide range of physical, psychological and social problems. Alcohol consumption can impact on both the
incidence and course of most health conditions. The WHO (2014) estimate that 5.9% of all global deaths were attributable to alcohol in 2012
and the harmful use of alcohol is a component cause of more than 200 disease and injury conditions in individuals. The mortality rate of
heavy drinkers is at least twice that of the normal population. Intoxication with alcohol increases the risk of soft-tissue injuries, fractures,
head injuries and other trauma, and short-lived episodes of memory loss (or 'blackouts') are particularly associated with heavy drinking. No
organ system in the body is unaffected by the direct toxic effects of chronic alcohol consumption, and many of these effects are compounded
by dietary insufficiency associated with the 'empty calories' of alcohol. Alcohol consumption has been identified as carcinogenic and is
linked to an increased risk of cancer of the mouth, nasopharynx, oropharynx, larynx, oesophagus, colon, rectum, liver and breast (in
women). Table 24.4 summarises the key medical consequences across all organ systems.


Table 24.3 Summary of Criteria for ICD-10, DSM-IV and DSM-5
ICD-10 Harmful
usea
DSM-IV
Abuseb
ICD-10 Dependencec DSM-IVDependencec DSM-5 Substance
use disordersd

>1 criterion >3 criteria
>3 criteria
>2 criteria
Hazardous use
-
X
X
Physical or psychological
X
-
harm
Social/interpersonal
X
X
X
Impaired judgement or
dysfunctional behaviour
X
-
Neglected major roles
-
X
X
Legal problems
-
X
-
Withdrawale
-
X
X
X
Tolerance
-
X
X
X

Used larger amounts/longer
-
X
X
X
Repeated attempts to quit/
control use
-
X
X
Much time spent using
-
X
X
X
Physical/psychological
problems related to use
-
X
X
X
Activities given up to use
-
X
X
X
Craving/strong desire or
sense of compulsion to use
-
X
-
X
Note: Adapted from Hasin et al. (2013). DSM-5 Criteria for Substance Use Disorders: Recommendations and Rationale.
a Clear evidence that the substance use was responsible for physical or psychological harm, including impaired judgement or dysfunctional behaviour.
b One or more abuse criteria within a 12-month period and no dependence diagnosis - applicable to all substances except nicotine.
c Three or more dependence criteria within a 12-month period.
d Two or more substance use disorder criteria within a 12-month period.
e Withdrawal not included for cannabis, inhalant and hallucinogen disorders in DSM-IV. Cannabis withdrawal added in DSM-5.

Alcohol is also strongly associated with a wide range of mental health problems, including depression, anxiety, drug misuse, nicotine
dependence and self-harm. Using broad criteria for mental health problems, a UK study found that 85% of patients attending specialist
alcohol treatment services had a psychiatric disorder in addition to alcohol dependence, the majority of which were mood and anxiety
disorders (Weaver et al., 2003). However, the proportion is much lower when focusing on severe and enduring mental health problems
(Graham et al., 2001). Heavy drinking can contribute to anxiety and depression, and can lead to non-compliance with medical treatment of


these conditions. Co-occurring mental and substance use problems are associated with worse outcomes than either problem when occurring alone.

Table 24.4 Medical Consequences of Heavy use of Alcohol or Other Drugs

Central nervous system
Cardiovascular
Pulmonary
Gastrointestinal and hepatic
Endocrine and reproductive
Other

Alcohol
Wernicke's encephalopathy
Korsakoff's psychosis
Cerebellar ataxia Alcohol-related brain damage
Seizures All forms of stroke
Polyneuropathy
Up to 3 units/ day may be protective for men>3 units/day (>2 in women) mortality increases as alcohol consumption increases
Hypertension Arrhythmias
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Aspiration pneumonia
Obstructive sleep apnoea Increased risk of infections, including tuberculosis
Reflux oesophagitis
Oesophageal cancer
Gastritis Pancreatitis
Malabsorption and weight loss Fatty liver Alcoholic hepatitis Cirrhosis
Gynaecomastia, testicular atrophy and impotence (men)Amenorrhoea, subfertility and recurrent abortion (women)Foetal alcohol syndrome Pseudo-Cushing's syndrome leading to obesity and hypertension Glucose intolerance and type 2 diabetes
Osteoporosis
Risk of accidental injury and trauma Proximal myopathy, weakness and muscle wasting
Psoriasis

Cannabis
Impaired ability to focus attention
Acute risk of myocardial infarction after use
Chronic bronchitis
Increased risk of lung cancer in combination with tobacco
Reduced immune response and increased risk of infection

Hallucinogens
Psychosis Flashbacks

Inhalants
Cortical or cerebellar atrophy Peripheral neuropathies
Sudden death from heart failure
Sudden death from suffocation
Risk of accidental injury
Kidney damage Hearing loss

Nicotine (in tobacco)
Stroke
Hypertension Myocardial infarction Aortic aneurysm
Cancer of mouth, throat, lungs Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Increased risk of uterine cancer
Reduced fertility Impotence
Low birth weight Sudden infant death syndrome
Poor wound healing

Opioids
Pericardial infection Bacterial endocarditis Collapsed veins Deep vein thrombosis (secondary to injecting)
Pneumonia
Chronic liver disease (hepatitis B and C from injecting)
Accidental overdose
Infectious diseases (HIV, tuberculosis)Abscesses Cellulitis

Sedatives, hypnotics Confusion Anterograde
or anxiolytics
Stimulants
Respiratory depression
amnesia
Seizures Hyperthermia
Cerebral infarction and
stroke Movement disorders
Tachycardia Hypertension
Arrhythmias Cardiomyopathy lung'
Myocardial infarction
Note: Adapted from McCrady (2006, pp. 773-774).
Chronic cough'Crack Severe anorexia
Malnutrition
Spontaneous abortion Neonatal
cerebral infarction Sudden
infant death syndrome
Accidental overdose (in
combination with opiates and/or
alcohol)
Atrophy of the nasal mucosa
Intoxication, dependence or withdrawal can all result in poor performance in social roles (e.g. work, parenting, relationships), and these may
affect both the individual and others. Alcohol is often implicated in domestic violence and poor parenting, including child neglect and abuse.
It contributes to absenteeism from work, accidents in the workplace, decline in work performance and job loss. Alcohol consumption is often
implicated in criminal damage, domestic violence, sexual assaults, burglary, theft, robbery and murder. Approximately two-thirds of male
prisoners and one-third of female prisoners, and up to 70% of probation clients are hazardous or harmful drinkers (Singleton et al., 1998).
Despite concerted attempts to understand alcohol-related problems as medical and/or psychological in the past 200 years, and increasing
research into the neurobiological underpinnings of addiction, problematic alcohol use remains a heavily stigmatised problem. There is a
clear tendency in many cultures to marginalise and socially exclude habitually intoxicated people and their families, and this is often evident
in restricted access to health care (WHO, 2014).
Different consumption patterns of other psychoactive substances are associated with varying levels of risk and harm, and the physical
complications are shown in Table 24.4. In addition to individual factors such as genetic vulnerability, the risk to which an individual will be
exposed through their use of drugs is influenced by the dose consumed, the route of administration, consumption of other substances, and
the number and length of episodes of use. For example, many problems associated with heroin use come not from the drug itself but the
unstable patterns of use. Heroin overdose can be precipitated by fluctuations in the purity of the drug bought on the street, and often follows
a period of abstinence when tolerance to the drug's respiratory depressant effects falls. Many of the negative physical effects of illicit drugs


are a direct result of injecting, a practice that becomes more common when supplies of the drug are limited. Opioids, amphetamines, cocaine
and benzodiazepines can all be injected. The repeated injection of drugs and adulterants using unsterile, contaminated equipment can lead
to scars or 'tracks' along the paths of veins, local infections, abscesses and ulcers. However, the greatest public health concern arises from the
transmission of blood-borne bacterial and viral infections via shared injecting equipment, including hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV. More
than 60% of heterosexually acquired HIV is related to injecting drugs.
The lifetime prevalence of drug misuse (excluding alcohol and nicotine) in mood disorders is estimated to be 19.4%, and the presence of
drug misuse increases the risk of depression nearly fivefold (Regier et al., 1990; Volkow, 2004). Although depression and anxiety moderately
predict substance use problems, the predictive strength of a diagnosis of bipolar, antisocial personality and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder is very strong. The link between cannabis and severe mental health problems is only now being unravelled, and there are strong
associations with psychosis in some users.
Purchase and use of the drugs listed in Table 24.5 is by definition illegal, and many drug users become involved in crime to support their
drug use. It is estimated that half of all recorded crime is drug-related, with associated costs to the criminal justice system alone reaching
more than £1 billion per annum in the UK. The nature of drug withdrawal syndromes and the associated craving for the drug may mean that
the need to obtain supplies takes precedence over all other priorities. This may lead to mistakes at work, lost productivity or unemployment.
Personal relationships are placed under considerable strain by dependent drug use, and problems with housing are common. The strain
placed on family members also leads to high levels of physical and mental health problems (Ray et al., 2007, 2009).
Table 24.5 Effects of Drugs, Commercial and Street Names, and Routes of Administration for Commonly used Drugs
Substance
Examples of street and
commercial names
Route of administration
Positive and negative effects
of intoxication

Cannabinoids
Marijuana
Blunt, dope, draw, ganga,
grass, hash, herb, joints, pot,
reefer, skunk, weed
Smoked or swallowed
Euphoria, relaxation;
enhanced appreciation of
sound and colour Slowed
thinking and reaction time,
confusion, impaired balance
and coordination

Synthetic cannabinoids
Potpourri, incense, SCRAS,
spice Various brand names –
Clockwork Orange, Exodus,
Pandora's Box, Psyclone,
Sensate, Sonic Boom
Smoked
Euphoria, relaxation, sensory
distortion Increased heart rate,
shortness of breath, nausea,
panic, disorientation

Depressants
Benzodiazepines
Ativan, Librium, Mogadon,
Temazepam, Valium, Xanax,
benzos, blues, downers, jellies,
moggies, sleepers, temazies
Swallowed, injected
Sedation, drowsiness,
relaxation, mild euphoria
Dizziness, anxiety,
disinhibition, amnesia

Flunitrazepam
Rohypnol, roofies
Swallowed, snorted
Memory loss ('date rape' drug)

Gabapentin and pregabalin
Pregabs, Gaba-P
Swallowed
Reduction in neural pain,
muscle relaxation, drowsiness,
reduced anxiety, sense of well-
being

Gamma- hydroxybutyrate (GHB)
Grievous bodily harm
Swallowed
Drowsiness, nausea/

Dissociative anaesthetics
Ketamine
Hallucinogens
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
Psilocybin
K, ketalar, ketaset, special K,
super K, vitamin K
Injected, snorted, smoked
Acid, blotter, cubes, microdot
Fly agaric, liberty caps,
magic mushrooms, mushies,
shrooms
Swallowed, absorbed
through mouth tissues
Swallowed
vomiting, headache, loss of
consciousness, loss of reflexes,
seizures, coma, death
At low doses - disorientation,
hallucinogenic experiences,
distorted sense of the body,
euphoria At high doses -
hallucinations, 'out-of-
body experiences', delirium,
depression, respiratory
depression and arrest
Hallucinogenic, altered
'expanded' thinking, increased
body temperature, heart
rate, blood pressure, loss
of appetite, sleeplessness,
numbness, weakness, tremors,
frightening flashbacks,
persistent mental disorders
Mildly hallucinogenic, nausea,
nervousness, panic, paranoia

Opioids
Codeine/dihydrocodeine
Fentanyl and its analogues
Heroin
Morphine
Opium
Oxycodone
Stimulants
Amphetamine
Cocaine (and crack)
Co-codamol, Co-dydramol,
Panadol Ultra, Solpadeine,
Alfentanil, Carfentanil,
Durogesic, Remifentanil,
Sufentanil
Brown, dope, diamorphine
hydrochloride, gear, H, junk,
shit, skag, smack
Cyclimorph, MST Continus,
Oramorph, Zomorph
Oxycontin, Oxy, killer
Injected, swallowed
Injected, snorted, smoked
Injected, inhaled
('chased'), smoked
Injected, swallowed,
smoked
Swallowed, smoked
Swallowed, snorted,
injected
Swallowed, injected,
Amphetamine sulphate, base,
billy, Dexedrine, dexies, speed,
uppers, whizz
snorted, smoked
Cocaine powder - blow, C,
Snorted, rubbed
Charlie, coke, nose-candy,
snow, toot, white Crack
into gums, injected
(powder)Smoked, injected
cocaine - base, freebase, rock, (crack)
stone
Euphoria, relief of mental and
physical pain, drowsiness,
sense of calm and well-
being Nausea, vomiting,
heavy sedation, respiratory
suppression, respiratory
arrest, death
Feelings of exhilaration,
euphoria, energy, increased
mental alertness Increased
heart rate, blood pressure,
metabolism, libido Clenching
jaws, increased body
temperature Rapid breathing/
tremor, loss of coordination,


4-methylmethcathinone (Mephedrone)
4-mmc, MCAT, Meow meow, Snorted, swallowed
MMCAT
Methamphetamine Crank, crystal meth, glass, ice, Injected, swallowed,
meth
smoked, snorted
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA E, pills, tabs, XTCVarious Swallowed
or Ecstasy)
'brand' names e.g. apples,
crowns, doves, Ferraris, Super
Marios
Nicotine Cigarettes, cigars, e-cigarettes, Smoked, snorted, chewed
snuff, chewing/spit tobacco
Other compounds
Inhalants Solvents (glues, paint Inhaled through nose or
thinners, petrol), gases mouth
(butane, propane, aerosol
propellants, nitrous oxide),
nitrites (isoamyl, isobutyl,
cyclohexyl) Laughing gas,
poppers
irritability, anxiety,
restlessness, panic, delirium,
paranoia, impulsive behaviour,
aggression, psychosis
Mild hallucinogenic effects,
increased tactile sensitivity,
empathic feelings Impaired
memory and learning,
hyperthermia, cardiac toxicity,
renal failure, liver toxicity
Stimulation, loss of inhibition
Headache, nausea and
vomiting, slurred speech,
loss of motor coordination,
wheezing

Note: Adapted from McCrady (2006, pp. 786-788).

Epidemiology
Worldwide consumption of alcohol in 2010 was equal to 6.2 litres of pure alcohol consumed per person aged 15 years or older, i.e. 13.5 grams
of pure alcohol per day (WHO, 2014). In general, the greater the economic wealth of a country, the more alcohol is consumed and the smaller
the number of abstainers. In 2012, about 3.3 million deaths, or 5.9% of all global deaths, were attributable to alcohol consumption, as well
as 139 million DALYS (disability-adjusted life years) or 5.1% of the global burden of disease. The harmful use of alcohol ranks among the top
five risk factors.
Alcoholic drinks are consumed by over 85% of the population of England. Household surveys in England in 2011 found that 61% of
men and 72% of women had either drunk no alcohol in the last week, or had drunk within the recommended levels on the day they drank
the most alcohol. However, it is estimated that a quarter of the adult population of England drinks in a way that is potentially or actually
harmful to their health (Office for National Statistics, 2011).
The latest statistics produced by the Health and Social Care Information Centre (2013) show an upwards trend in alcohol-related health
problems. Alcohol-related problems are an increasing burden to the National Health Service. In 2011-2012 there were an estimated 1.2
million admissions where an alcohol-related disease, injury or condition was the primary reason for hospital admission or a secondary
diagnosis. This figure is more than twice as many as in 2002-2003 (510,700).
'Drug use' is much more difficult to define than alcohol use, and can refer to many different patterns of consumption. Prevalence data from
Europe suggest that nearly 25% of the adult population have used an illicit drug at some point in their lives (European Monitoring Centre for
Drugs and Drug Addiction, 2014). By far the most commonly reported illicit drug used is cannabis, followed by cocaine, amphetamines, and
ecstasy. Levels of use vary enormously across the countries of Europe, as shown in Table 24.6.

Long-Term Outcomes
Researchers and clinicians have viewed the first 90 days after treatment or initiation of abstinence as crucial to successful longer-term
success or 'remission'. In line with this, Alcoholics Anonymous have a mantra that attending '90 meetings in 90 days' is an important
milestone in recovery. However, research has shown that in samples diagnosed as having alcohol dependence, heroin dependence and
nicotine dependence, there is a return to use in approximately two-thirds of participants in the first 90 days after treatment.
Table 24.6 Percentage of People Reporting Lifetime and
Last Year use of Illicit Drugs in England and Wales in
2012-2013
Last year use16- to 24-year-olds Last ye
Male Female Total Male Femal
Any drug
19.9 12.5
16.3 11.0
5.4
Amphetamines 1.7 1.0
1.4
0.9 0.4
Cannabis
16.8 10.2
13.5
8.6
4.1
Cocaine
3.6
2.7
3.1
2.8 1.1
Ecstasy
3.7
2.0
2.9
1.9 0.7
LSD
0.8
0.
0.4
0.3 0.0
Magic mushrooms 1.1
0.1
0.6
0.5
0.0
Opiates
02
01

Although research suggests that abstinence is unlikely to be maintained, it is often considered the only suitable goal for those with more
severe alcohol problems including physical dependence receiving treatment. However, studies of general population samples have shown
substantial levels of recovery from alcohol dependence without formal or self-help treatment. Some individuals prefer a non-abstinent, low-
risk or moderate drinking goal, and if they achieve this, their outcomes are as good as for people who maintain abstinence. However, low-risk
drinking is difficult to attain, and is sustained by only 15–20% of people who have received alcohol treatment (Maisto et al., 2014).
An analysis of data from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC) in the US found that only 25% of
adults with prior-to-past-year alcohol dependence were still dependent in the past year. A further 27.3% were in partial remission (misuse or
subclinical dependence) and nearly 50% met the criteria for full remission from alcohol dependence in the past year (11.8% asymptomatic
hazardous drinkers, 17.7% low-risk drinkers, 18.2% abstinent) (Dawson et al., 2005). The pattern of post-relapse drinking is complex, and
hard to capture in cross-sectional data from retrospective or prospective studies. Witkiewitz and Masyn (2008) have used the most advanced
statistical modelling to explore patterns post-treatment, and report three drinking trajectories: (1) frequent heavy drinking; (2) frequent
drinking following the first lapse and a return to less frequent drinking; and (3) infrequent moderate drinking.
Individual characteristics that predict a greater likelihood of an abstinent recovery from alcohol include being married, female, older and
having no 'personality disorder'. Self-efficacy, health status, financial status, Alcoholics Anonymous involvement and support for abstinence
from family, friends and work are protective resources. Studies of treatment factors have pointed to longer treatment duration and receiving
psychiatric or medical services as important for better long-term abstinence outcomes.
The prevalence of drug dependence is underestimated in retrospective general population surveys, and estimates of remission may be
higher for those included in the survey, compared to those who died prematurely or failed to be sampled. Therefore, a better approach is to
use prospectively studied samples of drug dependent people, but these are relatively rare. A recent systematic review reported that 25% of
people diagnosed as dependent on amphetamines, 20% of those dependent on cocaine, 15% of those dependent on heroin and 10% of those
dependent on cannabis may remit from active drug dependence in a year (Calabria et al., 2010).


Factors Associated with Substance use Problems
Children of parents with alcohol dependence have a fourfold increase in their risk of developing alcohol dependence. Genetic factors appear
to account for 30-50% of the aetiology of alcohol problems, with the rest being attributable to environmental factors or their interaction
with genetic factors.
Conditioning theories provide an explanation for the development of alcohol problems. Alcohol has reinforcing properties through its
pleasurable and anxiolytic effects. Conditioning may also explain why certain cues (e.g. the sight or smell of a favourite drink) can trigger
cravings for alcohol, leading to relapse after a period of abstinence. Social learning may also be important, as people can learn patterns of
drinking and beliefs about the effects of alcohol from families and peers through a process of modelling.
Adverse life events may trigger excessive drinking. People who have been diagnosed as alcohol dependent report much higher levels
of childhood abuse and neglect, particularly sexual abuse, and have a significantly greater risk of also having been given a diagnosis of
antisocial personality disorder or other psychiatric disorders (depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder or PTSD, psychosis and
drug misuse) than people in the general population.
Environmental factors account for 50% of the vulnerability to develop a serious alcohol problem and include affordability and availability
of alcohol, high consumption rates in the general population, occupational risk factors, social pressure to drink, and religious or cultural
attitudes towards alcohol.
From Classification and Prevalence to Practice
While the diagnostic systems and results of empirical studies presented so far help to increase our understanding of how problems present
broadly, their prevalence, associated comorbid conditions, and risk and protective factors, in the following sections of this chapter the more

practical aspects of delivering help will be discussed. Initially we present important factors to consider in order to increase the identification
of problems, before we turn to assessment, formulation and psychological treatments.
Identification
Only 10% of people with substance use disorders access treatment every year, and only a proportion of alcohol and other substance use
problems are identified by professionals. Therefore, before introducing a more detailed assessment framework, it is important to consider
ways in which identification rates can be increased and consider what immediate responses can be offered to increase the likelihood of
engagement with available help. A number of reasons may contribute to poor identification of those with alcohol and drug problems in
health care settings. Some professionals may be unaware of the common signs and symptoms of alcohol-related problems or how they
cluster and combine together. These may include repeated visits to accident and emergency departments, repeated absenteeism from work
(particularly after the weekend) or financial problems. Knowing what to look for can help increase vigilance and openness to the possibility
that a substance-related problem may be one of the causes of a person's difficulties.
It is possible that some professionals feel embarrassed asking certain questions and some of this may be linked to underlying feelings
and attitudes about problem substance use. A common experience described by Cartwright (1980) is the lack of confidence when enquiring
about substance use problems and lack of clarity about the health professional's role in relation to these problems.
The fear or worry of not knowing how to respond to a substance use problem is another common experience amongst non-specialist
professionals. A series of brief strategies will be covered later in the chapter that will help, but at a simple level, acknowledging that there is a
problem and recognising that something may need to be done can be an important step in the therapeutic process. In clinical practice clients
with substance use problems often recall visiting professionals in the past (e.g. in primary care or generic mental health services) yet finding
it difficult to open up about their circumstances. This reluctance, or indeed embarrassment, on the part of the client can also act as a barrier
to identification.

A further way in which problems may become evident is through the impact that alcohol and other drug problems may have on other
people, including those close family members and friends of the person with the problem. Some of the common experiences reported by
affected family members are discussed later in this chapter, and we also discuss some strategies that could be used to help this group directly
and in their own right. There will be instances where the person who has the alcohol or drug problem is not ready to come forward for help,
yet support for the family member and wider family unit can produce positive outcomes (Copello et al., 2005).
In addition to increased awareness of the type of presentations likely to emerge, there are a number of screening tools which are brief and
have robust psychometric properties that can be used to detect signs of existing or developing alcohol problems. Perhaps the most widely
internationally validated screening measure is the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (Babor et al., 2001). Developed by the World
Health Organization as a short screening tool to pick up early signs of hazardous or harmful drinking and identify sings of dependence, the
original 10-item version exists alongside briefer versions tailored to particular populations.
Identification and the initial open discussion of the problem may be a crucial step in the client's journey towards resolution of their
problems. When a problem is identified through screening it is important to follow this up with a more detailed assessment, and this is
discussed in the next section.
Assessment
In practice there is often overlap between assessment, formulation and intervention, and many of the components of a brief intervention
discussed later (e.g. the use of a drink/drug use diary or a decisional balance sheet) may form part of an assessment interview. As with
learning any new skill, the less experienced clinician may need to initially focus on the separate elements of assessment and formulation in
turn, but as experience develops it becomes easier to integrate the common elements of the two stages.
The assessment is likely to occur during the first contact with the person so it is important to use this opportunity to start developing
a good therapeutic relationship and build engagement with the process. Too much focus on paper assessments at this stage may lead to

disengagement of some clients. Clearly the assessment format and resources used need to be determined and guided by organisational
requirements of the service. It is necessary however to keep in mind that this is an important stage in the person's journey and every effort
should be made to fully engage and understand the person and to maximise the likelihood that they return for a follow-up appointment
if this is required. Some of the motivational principles discussed in the remainder of this chapter have implications for any stage in the
assessment and treatment process and for the overall therapeutic style adopted for working with this client group.
Most significant alcohol and substance misuse problems are complex and therefore require a comprehensive assessment that may span
more than one interview. The assessment should focus on a range of areas of the client's life and provide the assessor with the relevant and
important information to develop a formulation and treatment plan. It should also address any significant problems that need a prompt
response, such as medical or complex psychiatric needs. Assessment should cover areas including substance use, other problems associated
with substance use, motivational factors related to the substance use, social and family factors and impacts, risks to the client's well-being,
treatment goals and the client's strengths. The nature and purpose of the assessment needs to be clear to both the client and the psychologist
and it is always important to establish as part of the assessment the client's capacity to consent to treatment. The assessment content and
format may vary according to specific needs of the case. The next sections present a framework for the areas that should be covered during a
comprehensive assessment.
Substance use
The assessment of the client's drinking and drug use can be obtained through a clinical interview. Other procedures can be used to
corroborate self-report information. These include interviews with partners or family members, urine tests, hair analysis, and blood tests.
However, well conducted self-report assessments have been shown to be valid.
Completion of a drink or drug diary is a useful way of establishing daily consumption over a recent period. An example of a weekly
diary can be seen in Figure 24.1. A standardised structured interview focused on consumption can also be used. The Timeline Follow-Back

Interview (Sobell & Sobell, 1996) has been developed to assess in detail drinking and drug use behaviour on each day over a period of 1, 2 or 3
months depending on the version used. The method is based on a retrospective calendar review of each day's consumption. Although it may
seem daunting at first, this measure can be completed quite efficiently with clients, and it helps to establish a shared understanding of drug
use and alcohol consumption over a sustained period of time. Reviewing in detail the level and frequency of drinking or drug use can be a
rather challenging experience for the client. In some instances this may be the first time they have done such an exercise, and the immediate
impact of the findings on the client should not be underestimated. It is important to remain alert to this impact and respond appropriately
if required by acknowledging and exploring the client's response.
Simple questionnaire tools are available to quantify the level of dependence on a substance; for example, the Severity of Alcohol
Dependence Questionnaire (Stockwell et al., 1983) or the Leeds Dependence Questionnaire (Raistrick et al., 1994).
A good assessment of substance use should develop a clear understanding of consumption as well as clarifying questions such as when,
how much, what, where and with whom, and whether the level of consumption has led to the features of the dependence syndrome.
It is also important at this stage to establish any immediate needs that have to be addressed before more formal psychological work can be
effective. For example, the need for medically assisted withdrawal is an important area to ascertain. When a client is physically dependent
on alcohol or drugs, withdrawal symptoms will be experienced when decreasing or ceasing consumption. The range of symptoms associated
with withdrawal from different substances are given in Table 24.7. A checklist such as the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for
Alcohol (Sullivan et al., 1989) may be useful for quantifying the severity of withdrawal symptoms and guiding treatment. It is useful to
consider that important psychosocial work can also be done in some cases, for example during detoxification. Alwyn and colleagues, for
example, showed that adding a brief psychological intervention delivered as part of home detoxification programme improved outcomes at
1-year follow-up (Alwyn et al., 2004).


Names of
the drink
Time of the
day
How much
Number
of units
Where and
with whom
Cost
Monday
Vodka
Afternoon,
about 14.00
35 cl bottle
15
On my own,
at home
£9.00
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Total
Total


Figure 24.1 Example of a Drink Diary: for Week Commencing ______

Table 24.7 Withdrawal Symptoms

Alcohol
Sedatives & Hypnotics
Opiates
Stimulants

Onset from last dose
6-12 hours
12-24 hours
6-8 hours
24-36 hours
Sweating
X
X
X
Nausea and gastrointestinal distress
X
X
X
Raised blood pressure and pulse
X
X
Tremors
X
X
Seizures
X
X
Anxiety
X
X
X
Sleep disturbance
X
X
X
Irritability
X
X
X
Disorientation/confusion
X
X
Hallucinations
X
X
Muscle pain
X
X
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fever
Runny nose and eyes
Depression
Fatigue
Loss of appetite
Note: Adapted from McCrady (2006, p. 790).
X
X
X
X
X
If a client has not consumed alcohol or drugs for several days before the assessment takes place and there are no signs of physical withdrawal,
medically assisted withdrawal is unlikely to be required. However, if the client has cut down or stopped in the past three days, it is important
to explore symptoms and signs of withdrawal.
Alcohol-Related Problems
There is a significant relationship between the consumption of alcohol or drugs and social, psychological and physical problems as presented
in earlier sections. It is important to explore the extent to which these problems are present in the client's life during the assessment
process. Assessment of these problems may range from more structured interview techniques to the use of a checklist or an unstructured
exploration. A well-validated questionnaire developed and used as a clinical assessment instrument is the Alcohol Problems Questionnaire
(Drummond, 1990). The measure assesses eight problem domains including friends, money, police, physical, affective, marital, children and
work. As well as providing an overall and domain score, it can be used to explore particular areas that emerge as important for the client.
In addition, it is important to consider other psychological problems such as coexisting anxiety or depression symptoms. Here again, there
are a number of well-validated questionnaires that can be used, although caution should be exercised in interpretation when the client is still

likely to experience the physical impact of substance use and recent withdrawal symptoms that may influence some of the responses and
give rise to inflated scores on, for example, anxiety or depression symptoms due to withdrawal. When severe and enduring mental health
problems are identified (e.g. psychosis, bipolar disorder) it is important to liaise with appropriate mental health services that may offer the
best integrated treatment approach for someone with significant mental health needs.
Self-Efficacy, Motivation and Readiness to Change
A number of key psychological concepts are central to the assessment and understanding of alcohol and drug problems and the client's
potential to change behaviour.
Self-Efficacy
This is a term used to refer to the confidence that people have about their ability to cope with situations related to problem behaviour and
more generally to their confidence to bring about change. The concept of self-efficacy has been the focus of research into the impact of
increased levels of self-efficacy upon successful change in addictive behaviour. There are specific questionnaire measures of self-efficacy,
but it can be quantified more readily in clinical practice by using a simple Likert scale ranging from 0 to 10 in response to the question,
'How confident are you about your ability to change your behaviour?' This can be repeated later on to monitor any changes in perceived
self-efficacy. Rollnick and colleagues (Rollnick et al., 1997) have raised the proposition that in addition to high levels of confidence, the need
for change should be perceived as 'important' by the client, hence high 'confidence' and high 'importance' are associated with a greater
likelihood of pursuing and achieving a positive outcome. The Likert scale can therefore be used to rate the second question, 'How important
is it to change your drinking/drug use?' This pair of questions can then be used to monitor client's perceived importance and confidence
during assessment and also over time.


Motivation and Readiness to Change
Another important idea informing the psychological understanding of substance use disorders is that motivational factors are central to the
development and resolution of addiction problems. Several methods have been developed for the assessment of motivational status. They
usually involve allocating the individual to one of the stages of the cycle of change developed by Prochaska and DiClemente (1982): pre-
contemplation (unconcerned or unaware of the problem), contemplation (increased awareness and recognition although ambivalent about
change), preparation (decision made to change and planning what to do), action (making the change) or maintenance (sustaining the change
and preventing relapse). A validated Readiness to Change Questionnaire (RCQ) was developed by Heather and colleagues and later adapted
for use in specific treatment populations (Heather et al., 1999). The original treatment version consisted of 15 items with three subscales
(pre-contemplation, contemplation and action). The psychometric properties of the measure were good. Heather and Hönekopp later
compared the psychometric properties of the 15-item and a new, shorter 12-item version (four items per stage) using the UKATT sample
(Heather & Hönekopp, 2008), and found the 12-item version to be a slight improvement on the 15-item version, yet briefer, hence offering
clinicians and researchers a shorter and better measurement of stage of change in the alcohol treatment population. The revised edition
of the Readiness to Change-Treatment Version (RCQ[TV]) can be obtained by contacting the developers and is a valuable tool for treatment
planning and monitoring over time. The authors also reported a strong relationship between stage allocation at 3-month follow-up using the
RCQ [TV] and outcome of treatment at 12 months in the UKATT sample.
Social and Family Context of Substance use
It has been argued that not enough emphasis is placed in understanding the social context of substance use, given the emphasis on
individual models of problems and treatments (Adams, 2008; Copello & Orford, 2002). However, research has consistently highlighted
the influence and impact of societal norms and the social environment, including close friends and family members, upon substance
use behaviour. Clearly it is important to understand the cultural, social and family context within which the behaviour to be assessed

occurs. Different cultures and social groups may have different norms and hence levels of understanding and acceptance of substance use
behaviour. It is likely that the client's substance use occurs in the context of a social environment that engages in similar behaviours to the
client (e.g. drug using clients have close drug-using friends, and heavy drinkers spend time with heavy-drinking friends and acquaintances).
The composition of the individual's social network has been shown to change when the substance use behaviour changes (McCrady, 2004).
Having even one close friend who uses the same substance increases the risk of relapse after treatment, and the addition of just one alcohol
abstinent person to the social network of those receiving treatment can increase the likelihood of abstinence by 27% (Litt et al., 2009).
Whilst the precise processes involved are not clear from the research studies available, it seems evident that the social networks of substance
users contribute to, support or challenge substance use, and hence it is important to consider these factors as part of the assessment process.
A social network diagram can be used to establish the client's social network, relationships and perceived support for continued substance
use or change. An example of a social network diagram from the case study of Danielle is given later in Figure 24.6.
The client's family is an important part of the social network. It is important to establish both the impact of the substance use problem
on the family and the potential of affected family members to support and help the substance user's efforts to change. The impact of the
substance use on others includes the drinker/drug user being difficult to live with, arguments, financial irregularities, reduced social life,
incidents and crises (Orford et al., 2005). Of particular importance is the assessment of risk for adults and children that may result from
substance use. The potential for family members to support the user's efforts to change is discussed in more detail later within the social
behaviour and network therapy section and constitutes the second aspect to be explored as part of assessment.
Assessing Risks
It has become clear from the discussion so far that there are a number of risks that may be associated with alcohol and drug problems
that need to be carefully considered and assessed. In some cases a response will be required. As mentioned, there is a risk of physical
complications resulting from dependence and the need for medical management of symptoms associated with withdrawal.


There are risks associated with the potential for domestic and family problems, with the more severe end of the spectrum being intimate
partner violence and child abuse. Research has shown that severe problems do occur when substance use is present and it is imperative to
assess these risks carefully and respond where appropriate.
Significant associations have been reported between alcohol misuse and self-harm and suicide. For example, approximately 50% of all
patients presenting to hospital following an episode of self-harm have consumed alcohol immediately preceding or during the act of self-
harm (Hawton et al., 2006). In addition, the risk of suicide has been shown to increase 5-17 times in those people experiencing alcohol
dependence (National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2011). It is therefore important to consider and enquire about these risks
during the assessment process and respond appropriately.
Treatment Goal: Abstinence vs. Moderation
The discussion of treatment goals is important to consider as part of the assessment process. It is a crucial aspect of initial assessment
and treatment planning, and if not handled carefully and sensitively there is a risk of client disengagement. As a basis for negotiation,
each client's personal drinking goals should be routinely explored during initial assessments. Where significant medical complications are
present a goal of abstinence should be strongly advised. There will be occasions where client and psychologist have different views on the
goal. One way to proceed is to agree to pursue initially a period of abstinence (usually 6 months) before considering the goal of moderated
drinking or drug use. However, most psychological approaches are based on enhancing clients' motivation, and the client may only be
prepared to consider a moderation goal. An option here is to adopt a negotiated approach where abstinence is considered if a period of
attempted moderation is unsuccessful. If there is uncertainty from the client about the goal to pursue, further motivational work can be
done to work towards an agreed goal. The discussion and agreement about goals is a crucially important part of the process of starting to
work towards a change in substance use. It is essential to review the goal regularly and make any necessary changes (Adamson et al., 2010).


Formulation
Following assessment and prior to the initiation of an intervention, it is useful to develop a formulation and share this with the client. Earlier
sections of this chapter have outlined diagnostic criteria for substance use problems, but diagnosis alone tells us very little about:
• What caused the problem - 'what', 'why' and 'when'
• What factors may be maintaining the problem
• The person's lived experience of the problem
• Which intervention should be undertaken.
Formulation constitutes a way of addressing these areas that are not fully accounted for by diagnoses. A formulation is a collaboratively
formed clinical hypothesis which makes sense of the individual's problems based on information gathered within assessment. It is the link
between assessment and intervention. The sheer amount of information that can be gathered from clients during assessment can often be
overwhelming. As such, the authors have found it useful to formulate within two stages.
Stage 1 Formulation
Initially it is useful to develop a general 'developmental' formulation to organise and encapsulate the information gathered within
assessment. Developing a general formulation at this time point is useful on a number of levels. First, clients with substance use problems
who present to services often have multiple, interlinked problems that are important when considering the substance use problem itself
(e.g. co-occurring mental health problems, social problems like housing and finances, or interpersonal conflicts with family members). A
general formulation helps to encapsulate and organise this information. Second, the process of building a general formulation helps both the

clinician and the client identify treatment targets and the interventions best suited for those targets. A good developmental formulation tells
a logical story and identifies patterns that may be implicated within the presenting problem.
A general formulation system that the authors have utilised for this purpose is the popular '5Ps' model given in Table 24.8 (Johnstone &
Dallos, 2013). The '5Ps' model readily accounts for much of the information gathered in the assessment process, has good face validity, and
is easily understood by clients. An application of the 5Ps model to substance use problems using the case of Danielle can be seen in Table 24.9.
Table 24.8 An Outline of the 5 Ps Model
1. Presenting problem
This can be seen as more expansive than what is covered within a formal diagnosis as alongside the main
problem (e.g. excessive drinking). It can incorporate linked difficulties that hinder the person in living their
life (e.g. low mood).
2. Predisposing factors This can include a variety of biopsychosocial factors that may have put the person at risk of developing
the presenting problem. In relation to substance use these would be the factors that increased the client's
vulnerability to using substances (e.g. having parents who were heavy drinkers).
3. Precipitating factors Also referred to as triggers, this can include factors that directly precede the onset of the problem. For
example this can include interpersonal/environmental factors (such as arguments with loved ones and days
when wages are paid) and intrapersonal factors (such as changes in mood and the presence of withdrawal
symptoms).
4. Perpetuating factors Often referred to as maintaining factors, this refers to factors that help to maintain the problem. In relation
to substance use these factors could include having a partner who uses or the alleviation of withdrawal
symptoms.
An often overlooked area - these factors represent areas of strength or support that help to limit the impact of
the problem. This could include having access to a support network and past evidence of resilience.
5 Protective factors


Table 24.9 Using the 5 Ps Method to Develop a Case Formulation for Danielle
Presenting problems
• Heavy drinking
• Health problem
Predisposing factors
• Father was a heavy drinker
• Domestic violence in household
• Lack of care figure - cared for self - had to 'grow up quick'.
Precipitating factors
• Being on her own (trigger for drinking)
• Being around alcohol
• Cravings
• Feeling low - drinking to 'knock herself out'
Perpetuating factors
• Alleviation of cravings
• Shame
• Lack of communication within family about Danielle's drinking
• Ongoing mental health problems - panic attacks

Protective factors
• Grieving
• Sleep problems
• Supportive family
• Long employment history
• Able to remain sober at 'important times'
Stage 2 Formulation
The second stage of formulation occurs once treatment targets and lines of intervention have been identified. The clinician has a range of
interventions to choose from which differ in theoretical orientation. A second stage of formulation utilises one such orientation to construct
a treatment plan. Building formulations for specific interventions is covered within the interventions section of this chapter.
It shouldn't be forgotten that formulations can be modified later on in treatment as more information becomes available. For example,
it is not uncommon that the client is not completely forthcoming about the types and amounts of substances used during the assessment
process. Over time more information on these areas may become available, often as a function of a stronger therapeutic alliance, and
formulations should be adjusted accordingly.
It is also not helpful to dogmatically adhere to the 5Ps model when developing a formulation. Although it provides a well-accepted
structure for formulation, it should be used flexibly. For example, with a certain client a comprehensive account of the predisposing factors
may not be possible. In such a case it would be wise to attend to the factors where information is more available, while also recognising that
more information on predisposing factors needs to be gathered as treatment progresses.


The formulation for the case of Danielle in Table 24.9 illustrates that there may be some overlap between the factors within the model.
For example, the presence of low mood can be seen both as a perpetuating factor and a precipitating factor. It is better not to get too overly
preoccupied with fitting information into the 'right boxes' when formulating. What is more important is that the formulation makes sense
to both therapist and client, fits logically with the information provided, and operates as a developing working tool. Having developed
a formulation and having shared this with your client, the next stage involves choosing targets for intervention and plans for how to
intervene.
Psychological Interventions
Treatment research has shown that well-delivered, theoretically based psychosocial interventions for addiction problems lead to better
outcomes when compared to no psychosocial intervention, but no one intervention performs consistently better than another. In particular,
two large clinical randomised controlled trials for alcohol problems found no differences between active treatment arms (Project MATCH
Research Group, 1997; UKATT Research Team, 2005b). These findings have led some authors to argue that the search for differences
between treatments has focused on the wrong question using the wrong methodology (Orford, 2008). Although techniques are important,
the differences in outcome may be related to other factors such as aspects of the therapeutic relationship between therapist and client, the
philosophy within which the treatment service operates, or aspects of the individual's life outside of treatment. A qualitative study of clients
taking part in the UKATT trial developed a model of what clients receiving psychosocial treatment saw as important factors in terms of
helping positive change (Orford et al., 2006). The findings suggest the need to understand treatment as a complex system of many parts,
facilitating a nexus of cognitive, social and behavioural changes, embedded within a broader system of events and processes catalysing
change.
All of the interventions that have a strong conceptual basis and are backed up by some evidence have merit and are likely to lead to positive
outcomes. The precise intervention used will depend on the skills of the psychologist, the availability of local training and supervision, and

the preferences of the client. It may also be important to consider a stepwise approach where briefer interventions are tried first before
moving to longer, more comprehensive interventions such as cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) or social behaviour and network therapy
(SBNT) (National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2011). In some cases referral to a specialist agency may be indicated. We discuss
elements of brief interventions before considering more in-depth therapies.
Brief Interventions
Treatment interventions do not need to be long in duration to be effective (Heather, 2005). The simplest form of brief intervention
consists of a few minutes of advice about moderating alcohol consumption. This is an effective strategy in reducing alcohol consumption
among hazardous and harmful drinkers to low-risk levels in a variety of settings (Jackson et al., 2010), and it has been argued that such
advice should be offered as a first step in treatment (National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2011). Brief interventions are best
structured using an evidence-based framework such as the FRAMES model, which outlines the key components that should be present
when delivering advice (Miller & Sanchez, 1993). In practice, the key tasks involve providing Feedback to clients on consumption and
potential harms; ensuring that Responsibility for change remains with the client; providing Advice where necessary; and presenting a Menu
of potential strategies within an Empathic relationship that promotes client Self-efficacy. Advice might include the potential harms caused by
the individual's level of drinking and reasons for changing the behaviour, barriers to change, and practical strategies to help reduce alcohol
consumption. This might be used to develop a set of goals, with an extra session to monitor progress offered where possible. While providing
advice may be helpful within the FRAMES model, two other important tools can be used as part of the brief intervention: the weekly
substance use diary and the decisional balance sheet.
The Weekly Diary
The weekly drink or drug use diary was introduced and discussed within the assessment section. It is a powerful tool to establish the


frequency and quantity of substance use, but also acts as a useful tool to prompt client reflection on consumption behaviour. Figure 24.1
is a weekly drink diary with one entry based on Danielle's case. In clinical practice, the diary should be simple (at least to start with) and
make sense to the client. Sometimes it is possible to start with the most basic aspects of the diary (e.g. simply recording daily consumption),
allowing the client to practise the basic skill before adding sections such as 'with whom' or 'feelings prior to drink/drug use'. The diary can
also be used to monitor progress over time and between sessions. When used as a monitoring tool, client difficulties completing or producing
the diary between sessions should be explored as they may be indicative of ambivalence about overcoming their problems.
The Decisional Balance Sheet
Examining the advantages and disadvantages (pros and cons, or costs and benefits) of continuing the current behaviour or making a change
is a good technique for exploring the client's potential ambivalence, and aims to trigger thinking about current substance use and change.
An example of a decisional balance sheet is given in Figure 24.2. Completion of a decisional balance sheet in collaboration with the client can
help increase their motivation to moderate or cease their alcohol and substance use. Decisional balance sheets, such as that in Figure 24.2,
identify the pros and cons of change in four quadrants. In practice what becomes apparent is that one side of the table is often a mirror image
of the other; for example, a 'con' of drinking may be that it is expensive, whilst a 'pro' of reducing alcohol use would be saving money. Asking
questions from both sides of the quadrant is advised as more information is generated. It is also advisable to start with the disadvantages and
end with the advantages of change as this can help move the discussion towards change.


Not changing drinking behaviour
Box I: Is there something good that could come from this action?
PROS
•	Still get to enjoy myself
•	Won't be the odd one out who is not drinking when I go out at weekend
Box 2: Is there something bad that could come from taking this action?
CONS
•	Health gets worse
•	I could get very ill
•	Partner leaves me
•	Finances stretched
Changing drinking behaviour
Box 3: Is there something good that could come from taking this action?
•	Feel better
•	Good health – want to be here for my grandchildren
•	No more hangovers
•	Save money
•	Please my partner
Box 4: I there something bad that could come from taking this action?
•	Lose my friends
•	Lose something I enjoy doing

Figure 24.2 An Example of a Decisional Balance Considering Abstinence from Alcohol use
The real benefit of the process of completing the decisional balance sheet is exploring the client's ambivalence about changing their
problem behaviour. Highlighting discrepancies between a client's behaviour and their goals elicits 'change talk' (see later) and identifies
goals of treatment. On completion of the decisional balance sheet, if the balance is not clearly tipped towards change, it is possible to
use some of the motivational interviewing strategies discussed in the following sections to continue the process. If, on completion of the
decisional balance, there is a sense that the client is ready for change, the focus can shift to the development of a change plan.
Both the drink diary and decisional balance tools can be used as part of a brief intervention shortly following identification and/or
assessment of a substance use problem. These strategies may go a long way towards improving the client's situation. On the other hand, if
further work is necessary, the strategies provide a useful platform from which to move on to more intensive approaches.
As the complexity of the problem increases, a more elaborate intervention may be necessary, and extended brief interventions consist of
a more structured session taking 30 minutes or so and often involving one or more repeat sessions. This approach is usually based on the
principles of motivational interviewing that are further discussed in later sections.
More Intensive Motivational Interviewing Approaches
Motivational interviewing (MI) was developed by Miller and Rollnick as a challenge to disease-oriented approaches that focused on
confrontation as a way of breaking down defences when working with people using substances who were seen as powerless over their
behaviour and resistant to change (Miller & Rollnick, 1991). Within MI, ambivalence about change is conceptualised as a normal response,
and resistance to change as an expression of the therapist-client interaction rather than an intrinsic trait of the substance user. As a method
MI is client-centred and directive, aiming to enhance intrinsic motivation to change (Miller & Rollnick, 2012; Rollnick et al., 2010). It achieves
this by exploring and resolving ambivalence. While it has its foundations in the non-directive counselling of Carl Rogers (1951), it can be
best thought of as client-centred therapy with a twist (Arkowitz & Miller, 2008), as it is more focused and goal-directed. When using MI


psychologists aim to build a strong collaborative relationship with clients in the vein of Carl Rogers. In addition they also work towards the
specific goal of reducing clients' ambivalence in order to increase motivation to change the target behaviour. While it is directive in nature,
MI is not a confrontational method that coerces clients to change. The following sections of the chapter will outline some of the main
elements of MI that would be useful in working with someone with substance use problems. A more detailed account of this approach is
given in Miller and Rollnick (2012).
The Evidence, Concepts and Techniques of MI
MI has been shown to be effective for a variety of problems and client groups, and there are several reviews outlining this evidence (Burke et
al., 2003; Hettema et al., 2005; Lundahl et al., 2010; Vasilaki et al., 2006). The flexibility of MI is also exemplified in the research literature.
Alongside being a stand-alone treatment for a variety of presentations (Constantino et al., 2009), it has been used as a brief intervention to
facilitate entry into treatment (Buckner & Schmidt, 2009) and as an effective pre-treatment for other interventions such as CBT (Musser &
Murphy, 2009).
MI is more effective than no treatment and at least as effective as other viable treatments for substance use problems; these effects appear
early but diminish at 1-year follow-up (Lundahl et al., 2010). MI is also cost-effective, as less face-to-face time is required in comparison with
usual treatment programmes (Lundahl & Burke, 2009).
While they are often referred to interchangeably, Motivational interviewing (MI) and Motivational enhancement therapy (MET) are not
one and the same. MET is a specific, brief (3-5 sessions) structured clinical intervention derived from motivational interviewing but also
incorporating structured feedback. It was shown to be as effective as other psychosocial interventions in two of the largest multisite trials
conducted in the addictions field (Project MATCH Research Group, 1997; UKATT Research Team, 2005b).
Motivation has been described as a prerequisite in relation to changing substance use (Beckman, 1980). Ambivalence occurs when the
client experiences conflicting thoughts and feelings about a particular behaviour, for example drinking alcohol. In this situation there are


likely to be various pros and cons for drinking. For example one 'pro' may be that drinking may help to forget about work worries, but a 'con'
may be that it is expensive. So in other words there may be many reasons for change and also many reasons against change, and ambivalence
can be seen as normal and a common precursor to change. Motivation is not static, and it is not helpful to make a global judgement of a client
as being motivated or not motivated. Rather, when faced with an important change like reducing or stopping alcohol use, there are likely to
be various conflicting motivations, and these are likely to fluctuate throughout the course of treatment.
Miller and Rollnick strongly advocate that the 'spirit' of MI is just as important as the various techniques within it. This spirit has links
with the Rogerian influences highlighted earlier. It encompasses collaboration, the process of eliciting the client's perceptions and opinions,
reinforcing the client's autonomy and choices, and accepting the client's decisions. In keeping with this spirit, Rollnick and Miller (2008)
advocate that the therapist adopts a 'guiding style' as opposed to a 'directive style' (taking charge) or a 'following style' (going along with).
Miller and Rollnick (2012) have described four basic principles which are central to MI and are given in Table 24.10.
Alongside these principles, it is possible to identify various strategies and techniques that form part of the motivational interview style.
These are often used from the start of therapy, but may be returned to when needed during the entire course of treatment. The first four
(open questions, affirmations, reflections and summaries; commonly abbreviated as OARS) are derived from person-centred counselling and
help shape the style of communication within sessions, and are described and illustrated in Table 24.11.
Other techniques (agenda setting, importance/confidence ruler, decisional balance and eliciting and reinforcing self-motivating
statements) can also be used to enhance the client's motivation to work towards change and improvement.
Table 24.10 The Spirit of Motivational Interviewing
Expressing empathy
The therapist must aim to experience and understand the world from the client's perspective and to convey
this back to the client without criticism and judgement. This is a central component of reflective listening.

Developing discrepancy This involves listening for and reflecting back discrepancies between a client's values and behaviours.
Motivation in favour of change can be enhanced when clients perceive that their actual behaviour differs from
expected or desired behaviour. For example in relation to alcohol use, a possible discrepancy that could be
reflected back is:
'So it is important for you to be an involved parent, but at the moment you haven't been able to attend any of
your son's football matches as you experienced hangovers.'
The aim is not to do this in a confronting manner, and it is important to separate the person from the
behaviour being carried out.
Roll with resistance
With any important change, ambivalence is likely to be experienced. Thus clients may be aware of the
advantages of changing but also have concerns about putting changing into action. These concerns may
manifest themselves in therapist-client interactions as resistance and may be expressed as arguing, ignoring
and interrupting. The skill within MI is to recognise this resistance when it occurs and to not confront it
or push up against it (e.g. by arguing back). If the therapist takes one stance, the client will tend to adopt
the opposite one, e.g. if the therapist is strongly advocating reasons for not drinking, the client will tend to
respond by thinking of reasons for continuing. When resistance is present in a session it is a sign that the
client views the situation differently. Strategies that are helpful in managing this include shifting the focus
onto another area and expressing empathy and understanding.
Supporting self-efficacy Self-efficacy refers to the belief in one's ability to carry out the necessary actions required to change. It may
not be well developed in those with substance misuse problems meaning that they find it hard to believe that
they can initiate and maintain behavioural change. Improving self-efficacy involves identifying and building
upon a client's strengths, past successes and competences. Education on the topic of substances delivered in a
motivational style can help to make the process of recovery less overwhelming.

Table 24.11 Strategies used as Part of Motivational Interviewing
Open-ended questions Open-ended questions cannot be answered with one word (e.g. yes/no) or phrase. They encourage the client
to elaborate on their experience and help to reflect curiosity on behalf of the therapist. For example: 'Why do
you want to address your drinking?' as opposed to 'Do you think you drink too much?'
Affirmations Affirming clients helps to support self-efficacy. It entails listening for the client's strengths, successes
and positive qualities and reflecting these back, as well as acknowledging the difficulties the client has
experienced via statements of appreciation and understanding. Some examples of affirming statements
include: 'You have done a good job getting here on time considering the traffic problems today.' 'You're a
very resilient person to have coped with those problems.' 'You have been brave in taking the step to begin
treatment.' 'I appreciate that's it's difficult when you're uncertain about making a change.'
Reflective listening Clients may often present being unaware of the meanings or messages behind their statements. Reflective
listening helps to make these meanings more explicit by bridging the gap between the client's meaning and
the therapist's interpretation. It involves listening attentively and attempting a guess about what the client
is intending to convey, but doing this via a reflective statement rather than a question. Reflections vary
in complexity from simple reflections that repeat back what the client has said, to reflections of feelings
amongst others. Please refer to Miller and Rollnick (2012) for a fuller description of the various types of
reflection. An example of reflective listening:
Client: 'I don't know how many times I've told him, but I don't have a drinking problem. I drink when I feel
like it.'
Therapist: 'Your husband thinks you may have a problem, but you disagree.'

Client: 'Exactly, I only came today because he said he was worried and he made me promise I would come.'
Therapist: 'Your husband's concern matters to you.'
Summarising
Summaries may be used throughout the session and at the end. At one level they function as they would
do in other interventions, linking information together, clarifying information and highlighting key topic
areas. At a strategic level they can also be used to reinforce a client's change talk or positive statements in
relation to change.
Agenda Setting
The importance of setting a clear mutually agreed agenda cannot be overemphasised. Clients rarely present to treatment services with one
discrete problem. Based on what has been outlined so far in relation to MI, it should therefore be apparent that pre-emptively leaping into
a specific discussion of one area when the client is more concerned with another would be counterproductive. In instances where multiple
problems are present, agenda setting is vital in order to prioritise one clear objective. Mason and Butler (2010) promote the use of an agenda
setting chart for this purpose. This takes a graphical form with 'bubbles' representing different agenda items, and can be a useful way to set
the agenda for a session.
Importance/Confidence Ruler
The importance and confidence ruler has already been introduced within the assessment sections. A client's readiness to change is
influenced by both their perceptions of the importance in making the change and how confident they feel in being able to make that
change. A useful way to think about these constructs is that importance refers to the 'why' of change while confidence refers to the 'how'

of change. For example, a client who drinks alcohol might rate the importance of reducing their use as high (because of concerns for health
and arguments at home) but rate their confidence in mastering the skills to achieve this as low (due to past unsuccessful attempts and social
pressure from peers to drink). On the other hand, another client who drinks alcohol may be undecided about the importance of reducing
their use (because it costs a lot of money, however it helps to pass the time) but feel confident that they could achieve a reduction if they
wanted to (due to past successful attempts and not experiencing strong urges/cravings).
Decisional Balance
As a general rule, if importance is low it is advisable to spend time looking at the advantages and disadvantages of change using the
decisional balance sheet described earlier. On the other hand, if confidence is low, building up self-efficacy maybe the best way forward. Once
the client's position on the scale has been ascertained, there are further questions that can help elicit positive reasons in favour of change. For
example, clients may be asked how a rating could be increased: 'You gave yourself a score of 7, so it is quite important to you to reduce your
drinking. How could you move up to 8 or 9?' Clients may also be asked why a score is so high: 'You said that it was fairly important to you to
reduce your drinking. Why have you scored a 6 and not a 2 or a 1?' This strategy can also be applied for very low scores of 1 or 2: 'You gave it
a 2, so like you said, changing your drinking doesn't seem to be a high priority for you right now. I'm curious, though, why a 2 and not a 0 or
a 1?' A more exhaustive list of questions can be found in Mason and Butler (2010).
Reinforcing Self-Motivating Statements
Finally, eliciting and reinforcing self-motivating statements (or change talk) is another useful strategy in helping clients out of their
ambivalence. This is carried out by listening and reflecting back any such statements and in doing so affirming and reinforcing what has
been heard. Although the psychologist intentionally elicits and reinforces these self-motivating statements, it is important to not become


an advocate for change. Self-motivating statements may take various forms, but they will all be focused towards change, as opposed to
continuing the 'status quo'. Such statements include those that express optimism in relation to making a change (e.g. 'I know I can do it!');
commitment to change (e.g. 'I have to do something about my drinking; it's gone on too long.'); and emotional expression of concern (e.g. 'I'm
scared about what this has done to me.').
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT)
CBT is widely used when treating alcohol and drug problems (Beck et al., 1993). There is evidence for its effectiveness with alcohol (Project
MATCH Research Group, 1997) and other substances including benzodiazepines (Vorma et al., 2002), opiates (Pollack et al., 2002) and
stimulants (Baker et al., 2005). The aim of CBT as applied to substance use is to reduce the level of substance use and associated harm.
For alcohol-dependent clients, the primary treatment goal is often abstinence. Controlled drinking is an alternative goal that can be used
and may be more acceptable and achievable for some clients, as already discussed. CBT models can be used to guide individual or group
treatment and at different stages of treatment including preparation for detoxification or relapse prevention following detoxification. Some
CBT approaches are more focused on present and future behavioural responses, for example coping skills and cognitions related to substance
use, as opposed to more developmental cognitive aspects.
CBT as applied to substance use disorders is similar to the CBT approach to mental health problems such as depression or anxiety in that
it places importance on formulation, structure, collaboration, education, homework and the use of CBT techniques. In working with clients
with substance use problems, dropout rates can be high (Simpson et al., 1997). It is therefore paramount that psychologists also aim to
build a strong therapeutic relationship with their clients. The CBT model views substance use as being a learned, active decision-making
process and something that can be altered by changing the cognitive behavioural sequences that lead to use. Being a cognitive model, special
attention is placed on the role that beliefs play in this sequence, but behavioural factors are also included. Once the sequence that leads to
substance use is identified, clients are assisted in identifying and developing skills to deal more adaptively with difficult situations.


Cognitive Behavioural Formulation
Within CBT, formulation can take place at two levels (similar to the generic approach to formulation outlined earlier). At the first level a
specific (maintenance) formulation is established which explains how substance use is maintained within specific situations. At the second
level a developmental formulation is constructed. This is a comprehensive hypothesis or explanation of how substance use developed and is
maintained. It places the client's use within a developmental perspective. Both are described in more detail shortly.
Irrespective of whether one aims to develop a specific or developmental formulation, a useful place to start is by asking about a particular
situation where substances were used. Important areas to enquire about include the context of use, any thoughts that occurred, how the
person was feeling (physically and emotionally, including cravings and urges) and what behaviours the person engaged in. It is also useful to
ask about any thoughts and feelings experienced after using, as these can also provide clues with regards to the function of substance use. A
substance use and craving diary can be useful to help gather this information. An example is given in Figure 24.3.
Situation
Day, time, place,
who with?
Thoughts
What is going
through my
mind? What am
I saying to myself?
Feelings
How am
I feeling?
What emo-
tion is it?
Inten-
sity of
craving
0-100%
Behaviour
What did I do? If
I used, what and
how much?
Example:
At home alone
watching
film. Actress
reminds
me of my
ex-girlfriend.
I'm such a failure
I need a drink
Sad, lonely
80%
Opened the bottle
of red wine I was
saving for if guests
come around.
Drank the whole
bottle and fell
asleep on the couch.

Figure 24.3 An Example of Substance use and Craving Diary
Specific Formulation
Specific situational formulations represent the starting point and help to illustrate the interlinked, cyclical nature of substance misuse.
Padesky and Mooney's (1990) five-part cognitive model (often referred to as a 'hot cross bun') is a useful framework for a specific
formulation. An example applied to the case of Danielle can be seen in the bottom half of Figure 24.4.
In Danielle's formulation we can see the presence of substance-related automatic thoughts that take the form of short-term, fleeting
thoughts or images. These thoughts represent shorter versions of core beliefs and substance-related beliefs. Beck and colleagues have
outlined four main types of substance-related belief (Beck et al., 1993).
• Anticipatory beliefs
• Relief-oriented beliefs
• Permissive beliefs
• Control beliefs.


Developmental
experiences
Core beliefs
Conditional assumptions/
beliefs
Compensatory strategies
• Emotionally neglected in early childhood
• Father – drink problems, mother – mental health problems
• Abandoned by father at age 5
• Few friends
• ‘I’m bad/unlovable’
• ‘I’m vulnerable’
• ‘If I let myself feel bad I will fall apart’
• ‘If I cut out negative feelings, things will be okay’
• Use alcohol to switch off from emotions
• Avoid negative emotions
Figure 24.4 Developmental and Specific Situational CBT Formulations of Danielle’s Alcohol use


Environment
Seeing alcohol in
shop
Thoughts
'I'll feel okay once I
have had a drink.'
'That drink will help
knock me out tonight'
Image: 'liquid gold'
Physical reactions
Heart beating faster,
cravings
Behaviour
Buys alcohol and
drinks whole bottle
Mood
Anxious, sad


Anticipatory beliefs concern the expectation of a reward from using, for example Danielle's thinking that she would be okay once she had her
drink. 'Relief-oriented beliefs' are where the person assumes that use will relieve negative states, as exemplified by Danielle's thought that
the drink would knock her out. Permissive beliefs occur when a person gives themselves permission to exit ambivalence by using substances
and thereby giving in to the urge/craving (e.g. 'one more won't hurt'). Once the permissive belief is activated, instrumental strategies (or
plans for use) begin. If these plans are not disrupted substance use will take place. Thus if a person believes that when stressed, drinking
makes them feel better, they will continue to use in these circumstances unless such a belief is challenged or changed. Thus the CBT model
of substance use is circular, as a lapse can represent a risk situation and can lead to a repeat of the cycle illustrated earlier. The fourth type
of belief, control beliefs, differs from the others in that it constrains use rather than promotes it by constructing reasons for limiting use or
abstaining. For example, Danielle remained sober at important times such as at work or with her family. Control beliefs such as 'I won't drink
in front of colleagues' or 'when with family stick to one drink' could be present in these circumstances.
Once triggered, it is not uncommon for clients to experience images (pictures in the mind) as opposed to, or in combination with, negative
automatic thoughts (May et al., 2004). This is illustrated by Danielle seeing the vodka as 'liquid gold'. Images can serve as powerful triggers
and maintenance factors for substance use as they are often outside of immediate awareness. For further reading about other types of
substance-related beliefs and how to work with images, the reader is referred to (Mitcheson et al., 2010).
Developmental Formulation
Developmental formulations are useful in helping clients to understand the underlying factors that may have led to the formation and
maintenance of substance use problems, including core beliefs generated from early life experiences (Beck et al., 1993). This is especially
useful in cases where clients feel bemused as to why they cannot gain control of their substance use.
Developmental formulations are generated by examining the meaning behind clients' negative automatic thoughts and thereby
identifying basic dysfunctional core beliefs about themselves, others and the world (e.g. I am bad, the world is a dangerous place). The CBT
technique of the 'downward arrow' is particularly useful for this purpose. (This technique is described in detail in Chapter 3.) Patterns of

behaviour that clients develop to cope with these negative beliefs, such as using substances, are also highlighted. The link between these
compensatory strategies and a client's core beliefs becomes clearer once conditional (if/then) assumptions are identified (e.g. 'if I let people
get close to me, then they end up rejecting me').
In line with a developmental formulation given in the upper part of Figure 24.4, Danielle's core beliefs of being bad, unlovable and
vulnerable influence her perceptions and therefore what happens within different situations as diagrammed in the lower part of Figure 24.4.
Thus, for Danielle her intolerance of negative emotions is linked to her core beliefs of being helpless and vulnerable, and she copes with this
by turning to substances. It follows that the situation of seeing the alcohol in the shop is just one example of how her core beliefs influence
her substance use behaviour. It would be expected that the situational formulation (given in the lower half of Figure 24.4) would differ for
different situations.
Specific CBT Interventions
A combination of different cognitive and behavioural interventions are used within the CBT framework, often concurrently. A description of
CBT interventions used for treating substance use problems is given in Table 24.12. In Chapter 3, some of these techniques are also described
in detail. Cognitive interventions aim to modify substance-related beliefs and automatic thoughts. Behavioural techniques aim to provide
clients with skills in managing triggers and urges or cravings and can be used to help clients to test the accuracy of substance-related beliefs.
The initial focus of therapy is on the present (as displayed in the situational formulation described earlier). If interventions employed within
a situational formulation are not effective, work can then move on to exploring the role of the client's core beliefs and early history.
Table 24.12 Outline of CBT Interventions
Intervention
Target areas
Description

Cognitive restructuring
Cognitions
Using Socratic questioning, the meaning and strength of substance
related beliefs is explored and the evidence for such beliefs is
evaluated. Clients are then assisted in developing more balanced/
realistic substance-related beliefs which then serve as 'control
beliefs'. This approach can also be applied to images.
Behavioural experiments
BehaviourCognitions Bespoke experiments can be designed to test the validity of drug
related beliefs. For example, experiments can be designed to
ascertain whether certain beliefs overestimate positive effects
of substance use. Experiments can also test balanced/realistic
substance-related beliefs developed via cognitive restructuring.
Exploring core beliefs
CognitionsEmotions This can be employed once work on substance-related beliefs has
been carried out. Similar to working on substance-related beliefs,
clients can be assisted in evaluating the validity of their core beliefs
and childhood experiences and how close these beliefs are to reality.
If this is carried out successfully clients will begin to perceive
situations differently, feel better and use more functional strategies
for coping than the use of substances.
Craving management
Physiology
Clients are taught strategies to prevent cravings leading to
substance use. A 'toolkit' approach is often used:Distraction
exercises: Thinking about something unrelated/incompatible with
substances and switching the focus of attention from internal
experiences to external experiences. Examples include doing
some exercise or seeking social contact not associated with using

Stimulus control
Environment
substances. *Urge surfing*: Clients are taught that cravings are unpleasant, but that they occur, peak and pass (the analogy of a wave is useful in describing this), and that they can experience a craving without using substances. Urge surfing helps to delay substance use, by which time the craving has often passed. This method can also be applied to strong emotions via 'emotion surfing'. *Recalling negative consequences*: When cravings are experienced the positive side of using substances is salient. To remedy this, clients can be assisted to remind themselves of the negative consequences of drug use, both in the short and long term. It Is useful for clients to write negative consequences down and keep this note on their person or to place this on strategic sites such as the fridge or the drinks cupboard for when cravings occur.Other strategies include *relaxation strategies* (e.g. diaphragmatic breathing, progressive muscle relaxation), the use of flashcards containing important information such as the negative effects of using or *positive self-talk statements* e.g. ('I've coped when I felt like this before'; 'I'm strong enough to not give in'), *thought stopping* (e.g. using a rubber band and saying 'stop' or envisioning a stop sign) and *grounding methods*.
Clients are assisted in *avoiding triggers* (e.g. pubs, people associated with substances), or changing triggers through techniques such as removing alcohol from the house or changing routines that precede use.

Problem-solving
Behaviour
Substances may represent a learned strategy that clients use to
avoid stress associated with daily life problems. Teaching clients
problem-solving techniques can therefore reduce stress. For example,
clients can be assisted in problem solving how to avoid old drinking
companions or to limit how much they spend on alcohol.
Activity scheduling
BehaviourEmotion
As substance use problems develop, people often stop engaging in
non-substance-related activities which give a sense of pleasure and
mastery. When they cut down or stop drug use they are uncertain
how to use time and the ensuing boredom represents a risk factor
for relapse. Activity scheduling can be used to increase the repertoire
of meaningful non-substance-related behaviours.
Social skills and assertiveness training Environment
The client learns social skills required to respond in an effective
way to risky social situations such as being invited to a night out
drinking or using drugs. The client is taught to respond in a direct,
decisive and clear manner, and their body posture/eye contact is
reviewed. Role-playing strategies within sessions is particularly
useful.
Cognitive interventions can be difficult for some clients, as they may not be aware of the cognitive processes that contribute to repetitive
habitual substance use behaviour. In these instances the psychologist's task is to slow down this habitual process so that the client becomes
more aware of what may be behind some of their decisions and to show them that they have a degree of control over these cognitive
processes. Alternatively it may be advisable to begin with behavioural interventions. This is especially appropriate when substance use is
frequent, as behavioural interventions such as stimulus control techniques can yield positive results fairly quickly. Additionally, success in


using these behavioural interventions has the benefit of potentially boosting confidence and self-efficacy, which will aid further cognitive
work.
Relapse Prevention
The CBT model outlined earlier draws influence from Marlatt and Gordon's (1985) relapse prevention (RP) model which is diagrammed in
Figure 24.5. The RP model and its subsequent adaptions (e.g. Wanigaratne et al., 1990; Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004) outline a series of events
and cognitive and behavioural processes that may lead an individual in a high-risk situation (e.g. being in an environment where alcohol
or drugs are available, negative/positive emotional states, urges/cravings) to either a lapse (use of substance followed by a return to the
recovery or change process, e.g. abstinence) or a full relapse (return to a previous pattern of substance use behaviour), or to successfully
manage the high-risk situation by not engaging in substance use. There is evidence for the effectiveness of CBT based on an RP model with
alcohol (Irvin et al., 1999) and other substances including cannabis (Stephens et al., 2000) and opiates (Abbott et al., 1998).
High-Risk
Situation
Effective coping
response
Increased
self-efficacy
Decreased probability of
relapse
Decreased
Ineffective
coping
self-efficacy
and positive
response
outcome
expectancies
for effects of
alcohol
Lapse
(initial use
of alcohol)
Abstinence
violation
effect and
perceived
positive
effects of
alcohol
Increased
probability
of relapse

Figure 24.5 Marlatt and Gordon's Cognitive Behavioural Model of the Relapse Process
Note: Adapted from Marlatt & Gordon (1985).
The goal of CBT based on RP is to prevent or limit the occurrence of a relapse via the use of a combination of cognitive and behavioural
interventions, and thereby prevent lapses from becoming relapses. It was initially developed for those who had achieved abstinence but has
since also been used with clients who aim to reduce or limit their alcohol or drug use.
In line with the RP model in Figure 24.5, when an individual is exposed to a high-risk situation (e.g. a bad day at work), relapse is more
likely to take place when there are high positive outcome expectancies (e.g. that alcohol will help to de-stress) and low self-efficacy (e.g. a
belief that the person has limited control over their urge to use alcohol).
The RP model also includes the concept of the abstinence violation effect (AVE) or the rule violation effect. This concept refers to how a
person's beliefs about an initial lapse determines whether or not a full relapse to previous problem level behaviour will take place. People
who attribute the lapse to stable, global internal factors beyond their control (e.g. will power) are more likely to abandon abstinence or
moderation and move onto relapse. Conversely, those who attribute a lapse to their inability to cope effectively with a specific high-risk
situation may be less likely to move onto relapse and more likely to develop effective ways of coping with similar trigger situations in the
future.
Finally, the RP model also makes reference to covert antecedents (e.g. making seemingly irrelevant decisions such as continuing to buy
your newspaper from a shop that also sells alcohol) and lifestyle imbalances in relation to maintaining long-term change. Thus whilst a
person can be assisted in dealing with a high-risk situation, these covert antecedents and imbalances can operate as risk factors in relation
to future relapse. Thus the RP model argues that having difficulty in managing life stresses can then lead to a build-up of stress that can leave
people vulnerable to certain ways of thinking.


Integrating two decades of research on relapse prevention with mindfulness-based techniques, Witkiewitz and colleagues developed
mindfulness-based relapse prevention. The goal of this combined approach is to develop, through the practice of mindfulness, an increased
awareness and acceptance of thoughts, feelings and sensations and use these skills in the face of high-risk situations for relapse (Witkiewitz
et al., 2005). The newly developed model has shown promise in a number of trials.
Many of the CBT interventions outlined earlier can be used within a relapse prevention approach. In addition the RP approach also places a
special emphasis on restructuring the client's perceptions of the relapse process and global lifestyle modifications aimed at creating a more
balanced lifestyle (e.g. exercise, spiritual practices). Box 24.1 gives an outline of the RP model as applied to the case of Danielle.
Box 24.1 Relapse Prevention Model Applied to Danielle's Case - Abstinence Goal
Initially Danielle was assisted in identifying the situations in which she experienced difficulties coping and/or an increased desire
to drink. The therapist interviewed Danielle about past lapses and asked her to keep a record of these occasions in a diary (including
emotions and interpersonal factors associated with drinking).
Monitoring drinking behaviour for clients who are not abstinent (whether abstinence is a goal or not) is essential when assessing
high-risk situations. If the client has achieved abstinence, self-monitoring of urges as opposed to drinking behaviour can be used for the
same purpose. Such records also help clients to become aware of possible early warning signs for their drinking.
On reviewing Danielle's diary entries, it appeared that being in the presence of alcohol was a high-risk situation for her. She
recalled seeing alcohol in the shops when out shopping and consequently experiencing strong urges to use. Initially behavioural and
environmental interventions were applied. Specific coping skills in relation to urge management were implemented. Danielle was
taught how to 'urge surf': to experience an urge and not give in to it (the analogy of a wave was used to explain that cravings occur, peak
and pass). She found this a useful relapse prevention strategy and was able to use it wherever triggers occurred. As Danielle found it


hard to be around alcohol without experiencing strong cravings, stimulus control techniques were also implemented. These techniques
involved removing all items directly associated with alcohol (alcohol supplies, glasses, corkscrews, etc.) from her house, including any
hidden bottles. Alongside the overt cue of alcohol, subtle cues for drinking were also identified. For example, Danielle agreed to avoid
sitting in a particular armchair at home in the evenings, as this is where she often drank alcohol. The assistance of Danielle's husband
and children in carrying these changes out was very helpful.
These techniques are especially useful for people like Danielle who are in the early abstinence period.
Whilst stimulus control techniques are very useful, it was impossible for Danielle to completely avoid alcohol-related cues (e.g.
when grocery shopping, via advertising). Therefore cognitive interventions were also employed. Danielle's diaries highlighted that her
high-risk situations elicited strong positive outcome expectancies that drinking alcohol would feel nice and help take boredom and
negative feelings away (held with a high strength of belief).
The incident in the supermarket showed that Danielle was focusing on the pleasurable aspects of drinking the vodka prior to and
during her craving, and this was consistent with her substance-related beliefs. Thus she saw the vodka as 'liquid gold'. Using cognitive
restructuring, she was assisted in evaluating the accuracy and usefulness of her substance-related beliefs, with a particular focus on the
long-term consequences.
When craving, those who use substances problematically may focus on the short-term positive aspects of use as opposed to the
long-term negative consequences of use.
Danielle recalled that drinking can lead to failure to complete immediate, important duties (such as picking up her daughter). She
also reminded herself of some of the physical health problems she had been experiencing and how her family viewed her drinking,
which were both important long-term consequences. Danielle was assisted in reflecting on the fact that alcohol doesn't always take
negative feelings/boredom away, that hangovers don't always feel 'nice', and that there had been times where other strategies such as
talking to friends and going for a walk had also been effective in making her feel better.

Through doing this work, Danielle was assisted in developing a more realistic alternative/control belief, i.e. 'alcohol can sometimes
help me feel better in the short term, but it doesn't take my problems away and drinking itself can lead to its own problems.' She was
then asked to re-rate the strength of her original belief (which was now lower), and rate the strength of her new, alternative belief
(which was high). This belief was written on a flashcard along with the long-term negative consequences of drinking, and she was asked
to carry it with her and refer to it in situations where she felt tempted to drink.
In instances where the strength of belief is low, behavioural experiments can be used to test out the utility and accuracy of such
beliefs.
When recalling the incident in the shop and drinking the whole bottle of vodka, Danielle attributed this to being weak and a failure.
Cognitive restructuring was used to reduce the abstinence violation effect. This lapse episode was reframed as an inability to cope with
a particular high-risk situation. The lapse was then seen as a learning experience rather than a personal failing, and the need to plan
ahead for similar situations was accentuated.
Finally in order to address Danielle's lifestyle balance, some general global lifestyle modifications were implemented. It was
hypothesised that Danielle often used alcohol for stress relief purposes (to 'knock herself out'), so lifestyle changes to help combat
stress were introduced. She agreed to take up a relaxing hobby like yoga, and education on sleep hygiene was provided. A behavioural
activation approach was utilised to plan some of these new activities within Danielle's schedule.
Cognitive Behavioural Coping Skills
In the substance use field, one of the most prominent CBT coping skills manuals is that developed by Monti and colleagues which was
adapted and used as one of the three treatment approaches studied in Project MATCH (Monti et al., 2002; see end of chapter for link). The
primary aim of this approach is to teach clients how to develop the skills that will help them to master situations that put them at risk of


using alcohol or other drugs. Clients learn both intrapersonal and interpersonal coping skills. Based on social learning theory, the coping
skills approach views drinking behaviour as being functionally related to problems in the person's life. Thus, it does not aim to reduce the
impact of triggers, but rather seeks to train alternative responses to triggers. By replacing one way of coping (substance use) with a range
of coping responses, this approach aims to provide clients with a choice about whether to use substances when the need arises. Examples
of intrapersonal skills include the management of cravings and urges, anger management, coping with emotions and problem solving,
whereas interpersonal skills include drink refusal, handling criticism and enhancing social networks. The effectiveness of the coping skills
approach is well supported (Finney & Monahan, 1996; Holder et al., 1991; Miller et al., 1995) with evidence of it being at least as effective as
other interventions such as MET (Project MATCH Research Group, 1997).
Behavioural Interventions
Contingency management (CM) strategies or interventions are based on operant conditioning, that is, the use of reinforcing (and
punishing) consequences to alter the form and frequency of voluntary behaviour (e.g. Budney & Higgins, 1998). People using substances
problematically are given tangible, positive reinforcers for objective evidence of behaviour change - for example, abstinence from street
drugs or medication compliance. The important basic principles of CM are:
1. Identify a clinically relevant target behaviour (e.g. attendance at treatment sessions or abstinence from heroin).
2. Frequent collection of an objective measure of that behaviour (e.g. witnessed attendance, urine screen for opiates).
3. Selection of a reinforcer that is desirable for the population under treatment (e.g. money, vouchers, less frequent collection of
medication from the pharmacy).
4. The formation of a consistent and immediate link between the appearance of the target behaviour and the delivery of the reinforcer.


There is now an evidence base of randomised controlled trials showing CM to be effective in reducing attrition from treatment and illicit
drug use (National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2008). Although the technique has not been systemically used in the UK, NICE
identified 14 trials, all from the US, that met criteria for inclusion (11 involving stimulant users, three involving cannabis users). Consistent
CM benefit for abstinence was shown at 12 weeks with a typical reinforcer of $5-10 of vouchers per abstinent week. CM has also proved to
be useful in enhancing the benefits of opiate substitution treatment. CM plus methadone treatment is better than methadone alone, with
longer continuous abstinence during treatment and point abstinence at follow-up.
Significant limitations of the current evidence base include a concentration of studies in the US, limited study of the effect beyond 12
weeks, minimal study of strategies for withdrawal of reinforcers and impact on target behaviour, limited evidence on strategies to ensure
compliance with the CM model in routine practice, and an unknown acceptability of CM to clinical staff, service users and carers.
The therapeutic manual by Budney and Higgins (1998), available at http://www.archives.drugabuse.gov/pdf/CRA.pdf, gives a good
description of how to use CM in the treatment of problematic cocaine use.
Family and Social Network Approaches to Substance use
A contrast to more individually focused interventions is provided by those broadened to incorporate the client's social environment,
including families and wider social networks. There has been a recent increase in both research and clinical attention on the important
role that those in the client's social network can play when someone is attempting to change addictive behaviours. There are a number of
both family-based and wider network-based approaches that have shown potential (Copello, Templeton et al., 2006) including, for example,
behavioural couple therapy (BCT, McCrady & Epstein, 2009). community reinforcement approach (CRA; Meyers & Miller, 2001) and social
behavioural network therapy (SBNT, Copello et al., 2009) which draws from Galanter's (1999) network therapy, amongst other interventions.
Behavioural Couple Therapy (BCT)
BCT aims to eliminate problem drinking and drug use through the engagement and development of partner or family support for the


client's efforts to change (McCrady & Epstein, 2009). It focuses on changing couple and family interaction patterns in order to promote
stable relationships that lead to stable changes in drinking or drug use. Standard BCT is manual-based and structured, combining cognitive-
behavioural strategies with methods that address relationship problems that may have emerged from alcohol misuse as well as more general
relationship problems with the aim of reducing distress. Reviews of efficacy indicate that when compared to individual approaches, BCT
leads to reduced drinking and improved marital functioning (McCrady & Epstein, 2009).
Community Reinforcement Approach (CRA)
The CRA is an intervention focused on the rearrangement of contingencies in the client's living environment so that support is provided
for abstinence or non-problem drinking whist problem behaviour is not reinforced (Meyers & Miller, 2001). The essence of CRA is the
restructuring of social, family and vocational aspects of everyday living of those with substance use problems, so that abstinence from drugs
or alcohol is selectively encouraged and reinforced. Originally developed by Hunt and Azrin it has been developed by Meyers and colleagues
(Hunt et al., 1986; Meyers & Smith, 1995) and efficacy has been shown in a number of studies with both alcohol and drug using populations.
Social Behaviour and Network Therapy (SBNT)
SBNT focuses on developing clients' support networks to create conditions to facilitate positive changes in alcohol and substance misuse.
SBNT was developed in light of research findings which showed that general social support, alcohol-specific social support and the drinking
behaviour of social network members have all been predictors of positive alcohol treatment outcomes (Beattie et al., 1993; Havassy et al.,
1991; Longabaugh et al., 1998; McCrady, 2004; Mohr et al., 2001; Wasserman et al., 2001). SBNT was initially developed to help people
presenting with alcohol problems and evaluated in the UK Alcohol Treatment Trial (UKATT Research Team, 2005a, 2005b). Subsequently
SBNT was adapted and evaluated as a treatment for drug users (Copello, Williamson et al., 2006, Day et al., 2013). The UKATT results showed
that SBNT was as effective and cost-effective as MET while the evaluation of SBNT with drug users showed that it has promise as a treatment
for individuals who misuse illicit drugs. Further analysis of UKATT data using structural equation modelling showed evidence of a small

treatment effect on post-treatment motivation favouring SBNT over MET. Those who received SBNT were more likely than those in the MET
group to be actively trying to change their drinking at the end of treatment for three out of five of the treatment outcomes explored (Cook et
al., 2014).
A detailed description of this approach is given the SBNT treatment manual (Copello et al., 2009). What follows is a summary of key
features of this intervention. Originally SBNT was designed as a flexibly manualised, time-limited intervention consisting of eight sessions
based on the principle that social behaviour, social interaction and network support for change play a central part in the resolution of
addiction problems. SBNT focuses on developing the client's natural environment and existing support networks (and where necessary
introduce new ones, e.g. self-help) in an attempt to create conditions to support positive change in substance use beyond contact with a
service or formal help. As an approach focused on social networks, while helping the substance user, SBNT also has the potential to help
other people affected and concerned by the addiction problem. Within SBNT the user is identified as the 'focal person or client' while others
involved in treatment sessions are referred to as 'network members'.
The essence and conceptual basis of SBNT is that people have a better chance to succeed at changing alcohol or drug problem behaviour
if they can enlist and use the support of important people around them while attempting to address the significant challenges posed by
positive behaviour change. An important practical skill in SBNT is being able to 'think network' (or systemically) rather than focusing
exclusively on the person with the substance use problem. 'Thinking network' involves thinking about the client in their social environment,
carefully considering the ways in which the alcohol or drug use behaviour impacts on others and how others' responses in turn can
potentially support continued substance use or change. The overall aim is to mobilise positive social support for a change in drinking or drug
use through a series of sessions focused on a range of relevant topics. The psychologist aims to develop support from concerned others that
will not only become available during therapy but also beyond the treatment period. Homework tasks and role-play are key components of
the intervention. SBNT is therefore focused on the 'here and now' and the future.


The First Contact
SBNT starts by carefully drawing a social network diagram like the one in Figure 24.6 based on Danielle's case. The social network diagram
facilitates identifying those within the client's social network. It also facilitates determining how important each network member is to
the client; how they respond to the presence of the client's alcohol or drug problem; and how their help could be enlisted in supporting the
client's efforts to change. In practice, the drawing of the social network diagram is an important therapeutic tool. It enables the client and
psychologist to make sense of the client's problem in context. It helps identify the current social support available to the client. It also helps
identify some of the more challenging relationships that may pose a risk to changing substance using behaviour, by for example promoting
continued alcohol or drug use. As a tool it also communicates early in the therapeutic process the social focus of the intervention.
Tony
Uncle
Steve
Partner
Danielle
Robert
Son
Mathew
Son
Amy
Daughter

Figure 24.6 An Example of a Network Diagram for Danielle
The first session of SBNT involves three tasks: (1) conveying the social focus of the approach and the work to be done; (2) identifying the
client's social network through drawing a social network diagram; and (3) establishing the treatment goal (e.g. abstinence or moderation).
It is important to consider that most people approaching psychological help for alcohol or drug problems may not necessarily be expecting
that the help may focus beyond them as individuals to members of their social networks. Therefore it is of paramount importance to spend
as much time as is necessary conveying the philosophy of the SBNT approach, by emphasising the important influence of others on our
behaviour. It should also be clarified that only those whom the client wishes may become involved in the intervention. Towards the end of
the first session, using the network diagram, the psychologist may explore with the focal client those in the social network that the client
wishes to involve in the sessions or seek support from during the intervention.
The Remaining Sessions
Once the first session of SBNT has been completed, the psychologist can choose from a menu of core and elective topics. There are four core
topics including communication, coping/responding, enhancing social support and relapse management. In addition there are four elective
topics including basic education on drugs/alcohol, increasing pleasant activities, employment and minimising support for drug/alcohol
use. The final session is an opportunity to review progress and plan for the future. Brief descriptions of key topics or components of SBNT
are presented in Table 24.13. Psychologists can use their clinical judgement and collaboratively establish the priority areas that need to be
addressed for each particular client. The focus on topics rather than narrow strategies allows some flexibility in the approach. For example,
the topic 'communication' may be used to approach a potential network member, to explore how two partners communicate with each other,
or to discuss what happens to communication in the face of relapse. In Table 24.14, an example of the delivery of SBNT and how the different
components were used is illustrated with reference to the case of Danielle.


Table 24.13 Brief Rationale and Components of Social Behaviour and Network Therapy
Establishing social network
Drinking goal
Communication
Coping/responding
Support
Relapse
Relapse and support
The problem may have alienated some or all of the potential network members. A first step in SBNT
is to identify who these individuals are and, provided the focal person thinks that they will be
supportive, make contact with them, and invite them to take part in supporting the focal person in his
or her efforts to change.
Members of the network may not agree with the focal person or amongst themselves about the
appropriate change goal. An agreed goal should be negotiated.
The focal person and members of his/her social network may have been communicating ineffectively.
Together they may plan and practise improved ways of communicating.
Network members may have been coping with the alcohol/drug problems in ways that they recognise,
on reflection, to be counterproductive. They may discuss and practise better ways of coping. This may
involve role-play practice and 'homework'.
The focal client may not be engaging with network members in a way that is supportive. He or she
should be helped to develop ways of engaging with positive network members more effectively (e.g. by
contacting network members at times of relapse risk).
Network members may have different views about how to support the focal client and how to respond
in the event of relapse. An agreed strategy should be negotiated with network members and with the
focal person.
The focal person may find it difficult to enlist support from network members when relapse occurs.
There is a need to develop a shared understanding of the relapse process and to discuss joint strategies

for dealing with lapses. This may include the identification of early signs of impending risk for lapse
and possible responses to these.
Alternative activities
The focal person and members of his/her network may have been undertaking few joint activities
which have been pleasant, and hence the focal person may have little access to activities that are
alternatives to drinking. Together they may be helped to plan such activities and to increase their
frequency.
Developing network support In some cases, it may be difficult for problem drinkers/drug users to identify anyone who might join a
positive network for change, and it may be necessary to recruit a 'mentor' (e.g. an ex-problem user or a
volunteer worker) who can, for a period of time, perform the functions otherwise served by a natural
support network.
Social behaviour
Problem alcohol/drug users, at the time of seeking help, often show a lack of skill in social behaviours
necessary to make contact with potential network members and engage with them effectively. Skills
training can be used to address this deficit. This may involve training in communication skills such
as starting conversations, re-establishing contact by telephone with a potential network member,
composing a letter to a potential network member, or dealing with criticism from a potential network
member. The focus of this work is on engaging potential network members as opposed to general
social competence.
Note: Adapted from Copello et al. (2002).
Table 24.14 An Example of the Delivery of Social Behaviour and Network Therapy Intervention Based on Danielle's Case
Session 1: Identifying social network and agreeing treatment goal
As part of this session, the therapist and Danielle drew the
social network diagram illustrated in Figure 24.6. This was an
important experience for Danielle, who identified the impact of

Session 2: Communication
Session 3: General information and coping/responses
Session 4: Enhancing social support
the loss of her friends and her tendency to isolate herself from
those close to her. Danielle decided to pursue abstinence as the
treatment goal and to invite Steve to engage in SBNT, although she
was uncertain as to how to approach the subject.
Communication was explored as part of this session, and in
particular the difficulties Danielle experienced in talking about
her alcohol problem with Steve. A role-play practice was set up
where Danielle explored and practised ways of inviting Steve to
join the sessions. It was agreed that Danielle would invite Steve to
the next session during the forthcoming week.
Steve agreed to attend and the session began by introducing
the process, discussing the extent of Danielle's problems, her
past consumption and drinking goal. Positive communication
was discussed and practised, as well as how Danielle could talk
to Steve when her mood was low. The therapist focused on an
exploration of the interactions between Danielle and Steve. When
Danielle felt low she tended to avoid talking to Steve, who in turn
became more focused on his work. A homework task was given
involving setting aside some time each evening for Danielle and
Steve to talk to each other about how the day had gone. Some
of the session time was also used to explore how the children
responded.
The homework was reviewed and positive feedback was given
for completing it. Exploring the original social network diagram,

Session 5: Responding to potential relapse
Session 6: Responding to potential relapse
Session 7: Increasing pleasant activities
additional sources of support were discussed. Tony was identified
as an important source of support for Danielle and she stated that
she wanted to tell him about her recent difficulties with alcohol.
Danielle did not think that he would attend a session, but an
arrangement was made to ring him using a conference call at the
next session. In the meantime, Danielle would approach Tony
and tell him about the plan. Other forms of possible support were
explored, such as access to a local women's support group.
The first part of this session was used to contact Tony by phone
and introduce him to the session aim and format following
Danielle's approach during the week. Steve was very positive
and supportive of Danielle's efforts to change her behaviour. The
remainder of the session focused on thinking about the future,
explaining relapse and how to respond to a potential relapse
situation.
The work on relapse was returned to in this session. It had been
a difficult week for Danielle but she had managed to talk to Steve
and let him know how she was feeling. This quickly defused the
risk as her feelings of temptation decreased after her talk to Steve.
The session explored the process in detail, trying to identify
triggers, emotions and behaviours related to the risk of relapse in
order to further understand and plan for the future.
It became clear how little pleasant time Danielle, Steve and the
family had spent together in the recent past. The work in this
meeting was active with both Danielle and Steve exploring

Session 8: Review and planning for the future
different activities they could do with the children. It was decided
that they would go ice skating in the new rink set up during the
pre-Christmas period.
The homework was reviewed and positive feedback given on
completion. The progress during past sessions was reviewed and
discussion focused on the future and how to maintain the support
over the next few months, including how to respond at difficult
times.
Involvement with Self-Help Groups
Mutual self-help focused on substance use problems is delivered through attendance at group meetings and has a number of advantages.
It can either offer an alternative to professional treatment or may serve as a useful adjunct. Groups are easily accessible, providing access
at high-risk times when professional services are not usually available (e.g. in the evenings), and are cost-effective because they cost
nothing and clients can attend as often as they want (Kelly, 2003). Humphreys (2004) has identified universal characteristics of self-
help organisations, including members that share a problem or status, self-directed leadership, valuation of experiential knowledge, a
norm of reciprocal helping, a lack of fees, voluntary association and inclusion of some personal-change goals. Humphreys described 19
different addiction-focused self-help organisations possessing these characteristics, but by far the largest and best researched are the 12-
Step fellowships of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and Narcotics Anonymous (NA). Founded in 1935, AA estimates that it has in excess of 2.1
million members worldwide (Alcoholics Anonymous General Service Office, 2013).
AA views alcohol dependence as a disease with moral, physical and spiritual components. AA proposes that people with alcohol problems
fall into two groups. There are active alcoholics, and there are those whose disease is in remission because they are abstinent and practising
AA's principles. AA involvement provides practical support for remaining substance-free, a social network to spend time with, and a set of


12 guiding principles to be followed (the 12 Steps) (Donovan et al., 2013; Kelly et al., 2009). Results from systematic reviews show that AA
or NA group attendance confers a consistent moderate beneficial effect on substance use (Ferri et al., 2006) and participation is associated
with greater likelihood of abstinence, improved psychosocial functioning and increased self-efficacy (Donovan et al., 2013). There are
also alternative self-help groups such as Self Management and Recovery Training (SMART Recovery), a self-help organisation based on
motivational, cognitive and behavioural principles (Adamson & Ahmed, 2011; Horvath & Yeterian, 2012). Although not as large as the 12
Step movement, it is also available widely and developing in the UK. SMART uses tools based on methods including CBT and MI, advocating
choice so that those seeking recovery can find methods that work for them.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in England recommends that treatment staff should routinely provide people
who misuse drugs with information about self-help groups, specifying that
if a person who misuses drugs has expressed an interest in attending a 12-step self-help group, staff should consider facilitating the person's
initial contact with the group, for example by making the appointment, arranging transport, accompanying him or her to the first session and
dealing with any concerns.
(National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health, 2008, p. 187)
This advice is based on a series of studies showing that active attempts by professional staff to facilitate attendance at self-help
groups yields better outcomes than more passive approaches (Manning et al., 2012). Furthermore, attendance and participation in both
professional treatment and self-help groups is associated with better outcomes than either modality alone, and higher doses - that is,
participation in therapeutic support group activities through service, as opposed to merely therapeutic support group attendance, is
associated with reduced likelihood of relapse (Humphreys et al., 2004).
Professional treatment staff are an important referral source for people attending AA, NA, SMART or other meetings, and yet research
exploring rates of active referral to self-help groups suggests that clinicians outside the US actively encourage only about a third of their

clients to attend (Day et al., 2005; Vederhus et al., 2009). Referral rates are influenced by staff beliefs, and knowledge about such groups and
barriers that are often cited include an objection to the core features of the 12 Step programme itself, such as the concepts of a spiritual
awakening, powerlessness over drug or alcohol use, and the need to surrender. Professional staff may have concerns about self-help groups
in general and may be unfamiliar with the general philosophy and practice of such groups, and less aware of positive outcomes.
Responding to Family Members Affected by Substance use Problems
As previously outlined, substance use affects not only those actively engaged in the problem behaviour but also people close to and
concerned about them including family members and friends. There is evidence of increased psychological symptoms including severe
anxiety and depression experienced by affected family members who tend to be regular visitors to generic health care services (Ray et al.,
2007, 2009). As part of your clinical psychology practice you will come across affected family members, although they may present with
stress symptoms such as anxiety or depression in the first instance. A careful and sensitive exploration of the circumstances contributing to
the stress symptoms may uncover the daily and sustained stress of living close to someone with a substance use problem as a contributory
factor.
One way to attempt to reduce the harm caused by addiction problems to others involves the provision of direct psychological help to those
who are affected, irrespective of whether the relative with the addiction problem is in treatment. An example of such an approach is the
development and evaluation of the 5-Step Method to help family members in their own right (Copello et al., 2010b). Based on the stress-
strain-coping-support model (SSCS) (Orford et al., 2010), the method is brief, structured and aims to systematically provide help to family
members affected by the addiction problem of a close relative. The five steps of the method include: (1) active listening to elicit the family
member's experience; (2) the provision of targeted and specific information; (3) an exploration of coping responses; (4) establishing and
enhancing social support; and (5) discussing any additional needs. Further details can be found in (Copello et al., 2010b).


In a number of research studies, the delivery of the method to individual family members has been evaluated and has shown promise
in terms of reductions of symptoms of stress and changes in important aspects of coping behaviours either when delivered over a series
of sessions or one individual session supported by a self-help manual (Copello et al., 2010a). The method is based on the premise that all
behaviours and responses from family members affected can be ultimately understood as dilemmas. A clear exploration of the advantages
and disadvantages of each coping behaviour or dilemma can lead to a more considered and informed response by the family member and
reduction of the stress experienced. It is also based on the assumption that each family is unique, and as such there is no universally 'right'
or 'wrong' response. This is because each action will lead to impacts on a range of outcomes for different family members including the
substance user, the family member and where relevant, the rest of the family.
Pharmacological Interventions
While psychosocial treatments are the main interventions that psychologists use in treating substance use problems, it is important for
them to be informed about biomedical pharmacological approaches, some of which are described next (Schuckit, 2005).
Alcohol
Once an individual has developed physical dependence on alcohol, stopping drinking abruptly will lead to withdrawal symptoms which
may in some cases be life-threatening. In medically assisted withdrawal from alcohol, the severity of withdrawal symptoms is minimised
(or completely suppressed) by the administration of a long-acting benzodiazepine such as chlordiazepoxide or diazepam, which is then
gradually reduced over 7-10 days. Rating scales such as the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol (CIWA-Ar, Sullivan et
al., 1989) can be used to measure the severity of the withdrawal symptoms and adjust the dose more accurately. The use of a 'symptom-
triggered' regimen (where medication dose is dictated entirely by the CIWA score) can reduce the total dose of medication and the length of
the treatment episode, but is only recommended if trained staff are available, usually in an inpatient setting. The medically assisted alcohol

withdrawal process can usually be done safely, successfully and cost-effectively at home, although people with a history of withdrawal
seizures or delirium tremens, severe medical or psychiatric problems, or few social supports are likely to require admission to hospital.
Higher doses of benzodiazepines are required for higher levels of dependence, and doses should be reduced for children and young people,
older people, and people with liver impairment. In the case of the latter, a benzodiazepine requiring limited liver metabolism (lorazepam
or oxazepam) may be preferred. Other medications may be necessary during the withdrawal process. Alcohol withdrawal seizures are
usually prevented by using an adequate dose of benzodiazepines, but should they occur the best treatment is diazepam given rectally or
intravenously. If psychotic symptoms emerge as part of delirium tremens, antipsychotic medications such as olanzapine or haloperidol are
the preferred choice, in combination with benzodiazepines.
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (WKS) is a neurocognitive condition caused by a deficiency of vitamin B1 (thiamine). It is characterised by
an acute onset of a combination of an eye movement disorder, lack of voluntary coordination of muscle movement (ataxia) and confusion
(Wernicke's encephalopathy, or WE). Patients may die in the acute phase, and many survivors go on to develop permanent memory
impairment (Korsakoff's psychosis, or KP). Heavy alcohol consumption is an important cause of WKS, partly because it may lead to problems
with uptake of thiamine from the diet. Patients at risk of developing WKS during a planned withdrawal episode are those whose drinking
has exceeded 15 units per day for a month or more and where there is evidence of recent weight loss, vomiting or diarrhoea, malnutrition
or chronic ill health. In healthy, uncomplicated alcohol dependent drinkers (i.e. those at low risk), oral thiamine should be given during
alcohol withdrawal. If the risk of WE is higher (e.g. where clients are malnourished or unwell) prophylactic parenteral (intramuscular or
intravenous) treatment is necessary with a high-dose vitamin preparation such as Pabrinex. If WE is suspected or established, high-dose
parenteral thiamine is essential and should be continued until the patient stops improving.
As mentioned, medically assisted withdrawal is best seen as the start of the therapeutic process rather than a treatment on its own.
Although psychosocial methods are the most commonly used treatment modalities for alcohol problems, there is some evidence for


the effectiveness of relapse prevention medication. Two broad approaches are available: medications to deal with cravings and alcohol-
sensitising medication.
Medications to Deal with Cravings
Acamprosate and the opioid-antagonist naltrexone are both reported to be effective in increasing the time to first drink and to relapse in
people with alcohol dependence who have achieved abstinence. Both should only be used in combination with an individual psychological
intervention, started as soon as possible after withdrawal, and may be prescribed for 6 months or more depending on perceived benefit.
Nalmefene is an opioid system modulator that is similar in both structure and activity to naltrexone. It was granted a European marketing
authorisation in February 2013 and was launched in the UK in May 2013. It is indicated for the reduction of alcohol consumption in adults
with alcohol dependence who have a high drinking risk level without physical withdrawal symptoms and who do not need immediate
detoxification. It should be started only in people who continue to have a high drinking risk level 2 weeks after initial assessment. High
drinking risk level is defined as alcohol consumption of more than 7.5 units/day in men and 5 units/day in women. The evidence for its use
in this population is based on just two randomised controlled trials, but its use was approved after a review by NICE (NICE, 2014). Nalmefene
is available as an 18 mg tablet, which is taken orally as needed. The recommended dose is one tablet on each day the person perceives a risk
of drinking, preferably 1-2 hours before the anticipated time of drinking. If the person starts to drink alcohol without taking nalmefene, he
or she should take one tablet as soon as possible. The maximum dosage is one tablet daily.
Alcohol-Sensitising Medication
Disulfiram works by interfering with the metabolism of alcohol, leading to a build-up of acetaldehyde in the body. Drinking alcohol therefore
leads to an unpleasant set of signs and symptoms, including hypertension and a throbbing headache, making disulfiram a deterrent to

drinking. It is most suited to people who have abstinence as a goal and who have someone to supervise consumption each day. Treatment
should be started at least 24 hours after the last alcoholic drink, and disulfiram should be used with caution in pregnant patients or those
with severe mental illness, stroke, heart disease or hypertension. Patients need to know about the symptoms cause by the interaction
between alcohol and disulfiram and the rare and unpredictable onset of hepatotoxicity.
Illicit Drug use
One of the key aims of treatment for drug misuse problems is the reduction of associated medical or social harms. Injecting any illicit drug
carries a significant risk of infection, particularly when equipment is shared or poorly cleaned. Advice about improved injection technique
and cleaning of equipment can be effective in reducing this risk, particularly when combined with the provision of clean needles and
syringes via local needle exchange schemes.
Heroin
Individuals using small amounts of heroin may be able to stop abruptly using medication to help the symptoms of opioid withdrawal (i.e.
muscular aches, diarrhoea, vomiting, agitation, insomnia). This is normally accompanied by an explanation of the likely withdrawal side
effects and their time course. Those with dependence on higher doses of heroin or with longer histories of drug use may not be able to
tolerate such a simple detoxification process and may require a more complex medical regime. Lofexidine is a non-opioid method of reducing
heroin withdrawal symptoms. It is an effective way of reducing the severity of withdrawal symptoms, but it also causes low blood pressure
and so the dose needs to be built up slowly and blood pressure monitoring may be necessary. The opioid partial agonist buprenorphine is also
an effective detoxification agent, as it can quickly suppress withdrawal symptoms and then be reduced and withdrawn over 14 days.
'Substitute' prescribing implies the use of a legally prescribed drug instead of an illegal drug of unknown purity and quality. Methadone
maintenance therapy (MMT) has been used for over 40 years in the management of heroin dependence, and research has demonstrated

clear benefits in reducing illicit opioid use, HIV infection and criminal activity. Its effectiveness appears to be dependent on a range of
factors including dose, retention in treatment and psychosocial support. There is evidence to suggest that the regimes most successful at
reducing illicit drug intake are those involving higher daily doses of the substitute drug (approximately 60-120 mg methadone), but that the
prescription of high doses of drugs should only occur in conjunction with daily supervision and psychosocial interventions.
Buprenorphine is a partial opioid agonist, and so produces less euphoria, sedation or respiratory depression than heroin or methadone.
It also has a longer half-life, and discontinuation leads to less severe withdrawal symptoms. Buprenorphine maintenance therapy is a more
recently established approach than methadone, but there is a growing evidence base supporting equivalent effectiveness to methadone in
maintenance treatment.
Stimulants
There is no convincing evidence supporting the use of pharmacological treatment for amphetamines and cocaine misuse and dependence.
Psychosocial interventions such as CBT and contingency management remain the mainstay of treatment. Stimulant use may also carry a
risk of precipitating psychiatric symptoms such as psychosis or depression, and these will also need assessment and adequate treatment.
Benzodiazepines
Dependence on benzodiazepines may be tackled by prescribing an initial 'maintenance' period whilst other factors are stabilised, followed
by a planned slow reduction of the benzodiazepine. The starting dose and reducing regime are negotiated between prescriber and patient,
aiming to minimise withdrawal symptoms. Clear criteria for review and goals of progress should be established before starting. A summary
of many of the pharmacological interventions for substance use including typical dosage, potential side effects and contraindications is
given in Table 24.15.


Summary
There are two main ways that health professionals think about substance use: the diagnostic category approach and the dimensional
or spectrum approach. The WHO describes three categories: hazardous drinking, harmful drinking and alcohol dependence. The latter
two categories are identified as disorders in ICD-10. In DSM-5, a spectrum approach is taken. A single diagnostic category of alcohol use
disorder is given which has different levels of severity. Substance use is associated with a wide range of physical, psychological and social
problems. About a quarter of the adult population of England drinks in a way that is potentially or actually harmful to their health. In
Europe nearly a quarter of the adult population have used an illicit drug at some point in their lives. Only 10% of people with substance
use disorders access treatment. This could be improved by routine use of the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test. There is a return
to use in approximately two-thirds of individuals with alcohol of heroin dependence in the first 90 days after treatment. Genetic factors,
conditioning, social learning through modelling, stressful life events, drug availability, and social and cultural factors all contribute to the
aetiology of substance use problems. Protective factors that predict a greater likelihood of an abstinent recovery from alcohol include being
female, older, married, financially secure, in good health, the absence of a personality disorder diagnosis, high self-efficacy, involvement in
Alcoholics Anonymous and support for abstinence from family, friends and work colleagues. Assessment of individuals who engage with
services should cover substance use and associated problems, self-efficacy, motivation, social and family factors, risk, treatment goals and
protective factors. Assessment should inform both a general developmental formulation using the 5Ps model and a specific formulation
focused on maintaining factors to guide intervention. Treatment research has shown that well-delivered, theoretically based psychosocial
interventions for addiction problems lead to better outcomes when compared to no psychosocial intervention, but no one intervention
performs consistently better than another. Brief interventions (including MI), CBT approaches (including RP) and social interventions
(including SBNT) are particularly useful. There is also evidence for the use of pharmacological interventions in the treatment of some
substance use problems.

Table 24.15 Pharmacological treatments for substance use disorders
Indicated use
Medication
Opiate withdrawal
Buprenorphine
Methadone
Lofexidine
Alcohol withdrawal
(uncomplicated)
Chlordiazepoxide (or other
long-acting benzodiazepine,
e.g. diazepam)
Alcohol withdrawal
(complicated by liver
impairment)
Lorazepam or other
benzodiazepine not
Typical dosage
From heroin: establish dose to
prevent withdrawal symptoms
over 2 days, and reduce to zero
over 2-4 weeks. From maintenance
buprenorphine: Rate of reduction
best dictated by the user.
Suggested rate might be 4 mg/
week until 8-10 mg is reached,
then 2 mg/week until 2 mg is
reached, then 0.4 mg each time
until zero.
From heroin: better to use
buprenorphine.From maintenance
methadone: Rate of reduction best
dictated by the user. Up to 10%/
day as an inpatient, 5%/week as
an outpatient.
0.4-0.6 mg qds for 7-10 days,
tapering up at the beginning and
down at the end over 3 days.
Taper: 20-30 mg chlordiazepoxide
qds, reduced to zero over 5-7 days.
Symptom-triggered: Use CIWA-Ar
every 90 mins to assess level of
withdrawal, and dose dispensed
dictated by score.
As above
Side effects
ConstipationNausea
Nausea and vomitingConstipation Drowsiness Respiratory
depressionHypotension
Sedation, drowsiness, fatigue, dry mouth
Contraindications
Severe, recurrent acute or chronic
pain conditions (where opioid
analgesia with a full opioid agonist
may be required). Overdose risk -
advise to avoid the use of sedative
or hypnotic drugs including
benzodiazepines, alcohol and
other opioids in conjunction with
buprenorphine.
Overdose risk - advise to avoid the
use of sedative or hypnotic drugs
including benzodiazepines, alcohol
and other opioids in conjunction
with methadone. Cardiac disease,
known QTc prolongation.
Cardiac disease, known QTc
prolongation
Selection of medication,
dose and regimen depend
on location (inpatient or
community). Interaction with
other sedative medications and
alcohol may increase risk of
accidental overdose.
Accumulation of metabolites due
to liver failure may lead to coma
and death

Alcohol withdrawal
complicated by withdrawal
seizures
Alcohol withdrawal
complicated by delirium
tremens
Benzodiazepine withdrawal
Opiate substitution therapy
Alcohol relapse prevention
predominantly metabolised
in the liver, e.g. oxazepam
Chlordiazepoxide
Chlordiazepoxide or
diazepam + antipsychotic
medication if severe
Tapering of drug of abuse
over 6-12 weeks
Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine- naloxone
Methadone
Acamprosate
Naltrexone
Disulfiram
Nalmefene
Early treatment of alcohol
withdrawal symptoms with
adequate dose of benzodiazepines
will usually prevent seizures
Olanzapine 10-20 mg
per day, oral or 5-10 mg
intramuscularly.Haloperidol 2-
10 mg, then every 4-8 hours
according to response up.
Conversion of short-acting to
long-acting benzodiazepine
Optimum maintenance dose > 12
mg/day
Prescribe as for buprenorphine.
Addition of naloxone discourages
illicit intravenous use.
Optimum maintenance dose >60
mg/day
Two 333 mg tablets tds if weight
>60 kg, otherwise four tablets/day
50 mg/day
200 mg/day
One 18 mg tablet on each day
the person perceives a risk of
drinking, 1-2 hours before the
Antipsychotics may reduce seizure threshold
Severe sleep disturbanceIrritability and tensionAnxiety and panic
attacks TremorSweatingPoor concentration Confusion and cognitive
difficulty HeadacheMuscular pain and stiffness
ConstipationNausea
Precipitated withdrawal if injected
Nausea and vomitingConstipation DrowsinessRespiratory
depression Hypotension
DiarrhoeaNausea Vomiting
HeadacheDizzinessFatigue
Acute hepatitis DrowsinessImpotenceHeadache
DizzinessNauseaInsomnia
See above
Pregnancy
See above
Currently taking opioid
analgesics.Current opioid
addiction.Severe hepatic or renal
impairment.
Recent use of alcohol-
containing product.Severe heart
disease.Psychosis.Sensitivity to
thiuram derivatives.Safety not
established for pregnancy (use if
benefits outweigh risks).
See naltrexone

Opiate relapse prevention Naltrexone
Note: Adapted from McCrady (2006, pp. 784-785).
anticipated time of drinking. If
the person starts to drink alcohol
without taking nalmefene, take
one tablet as soon as possible
One 50 mg tablet/day.Long-acting
depot or implantable version
available.
Acute liver dysfunction or liver
failure.Increased risk of accidental
overdose whilst taking naltrexone.
Alcohol and drug problems can be complex and challenging, particularly for the less experienced clinician. The chapter has attempted to
provide the reader with a range of approaches and models of intervention. It is not uncommon to feel uncertain when first faced with
a client with an addiction problem. It is important to remember that those with addiction problems may need more than one episode of
intervention before a successful outcome is achieved. There are some tensions within the substance use assessment and treatment field.
For example, there is debate between those who advocate a categorical approach and those who adopt a dimensional or motivational
approach which avoids labelling individuals as alcoholics or addicts. There are also differences between individual models for understanding
substance use problems based on intrapersonal factors and wider models which adopt a social and family-oriented framework. These
apparently conflicting perspectives are not necessarily mutually exclusive, and continue to be the focus for constructive debate. As a clinical
psychologist it is important to use available evidence to inform a careful assessment and formulation. This will facilitate a comprehensive
understanding of each case and guide intervention. In many cases psychological treatment as outlined in this chapter can make a significant
difference to those experiencing addiction and their families.
Exercises
Exercise 1. Exploring and developing social support for behaviour change


Try this task on yourself first. Think about those people who are important to you and draw a social network as illustrated in Figure 24.6. Use
people's names to make it real. Make sure you include everyone who is important to you even if you are not particularly close at this point in
time or there are problems with the relationship. Once you have drawn your social network think of a goal you would like to achieve. It is best
to choose a simple goal (e.g. taking up exercise or enrolling for a training course). Look at your social network and, considering all members,
identify who in your network can support you in achieving the chosen goal and in what way (e.g. a member of your network may join you in
your first visit to the gym; another member may look after your child while you go to the gym). You can repeat this exercise with someone
you know by interviewing him or her following the same process. Think about the process and how social support can be identified and
assist in the achievement of your goal. Reflect on these processes in relation to those aiming to change substance use behaviour.
Exercise 2. Completing a weekly consumption diary
Try completing a consumption diary (Figure 24.1) retrospectively, entering the type and volume of alcohol you have drunk over the previous
week. Start with the closest day and work backwards. If you cannot remember, try and think about what you were doing on that day or who
you were with. If you do not consume alcohol, choose another behaviour such as smoking or similar. Be careful and systematic, indicating
the types of drinks, amounts and with whom. You can repeat this exercise with someone you know and who agrees to do it with your help.
Exercise 3. Exploring ambivalence and the 'righting reflex'
1. Choose a colleague/friend who may be contemplating making a behavioural change of some kind. Common examples include giving
up/reducing smoking nicotine or drinking alcohol, going on a diet, or taking up or increasing physical exercise. For this task complete a
decisional balance chart for this change following the example given in the chapter (Figure 24.2). Be mindful of using the OARS format
of questioning (Table 24.11) when completing the chart.


2. Again, with the agreement of a friend/colleague carry out this experiment to show how the righting reflex may manifest itself when
discussing behavioural change. For your friends/colleagues given behavioural change (e.g. giving up/reducing smoking nicotine or
drinking alcohol, going on a diet, or taking up or increasing physical exercise) play the role of interviewer and have a discussion about
the change that your friend/colleague is contemplating:
1. For the first 5 minutes of the task be 'directive' and advocate strongly for whatever change your friend/colleague is contemplating
(e.g. promote the fact that your friend/colleague should give up smoking, or that they should do more exercise).
2. For the next 5 minutes, adopt a motivational approach and practise some of the 'guiding' principles outlined in the chapter. (e.g. use
of OARS).
3. Throughout this exercise be mindful of how your interviewee responds when directing and guiding and reflect on this with your
interviewee on completion.
Exercise 4. Understanding self-help
Everyone helping people who may experience alcohol or drug problems should be familiar with self-help group meetings including 12-Step
groups such as AA and NA and those for affected families (e.g. Al-Anon), as well as other alternatives such as SMART. There will be meetings
available locally. All clinicians should attend at least one meeting to develop an understanding of how they work, how new members are
welcomed and received into the meetings. (A list of local AA meetings can be found at http://www.alcoholics-anonymous.org.uk, and NA
meetings at http://www.ukna.org.) Meetings marked as 'open' are open to professionals or other individuals who aren't looking to stop using
alcohol or drugs, but many meetings may be opened up by simply asking the meeting secretary beforehand. SMART recovery conducts
meetings in different geographical areas and also online. You can find a meeting by accessing the 'Meetings' link on the SMART Recovery
website.


Further reading for practitioners
Davis, P., Patton, R., & Jackson, S. (Eds.). (2015). Addiction, Psychology and Treatment. Chichester: Wiley.
Day, E. (Ed.). (2007). Clinical Topics in Addiction. London: The Royal College of Psychiatrists.
Miller, W. R., Forcehimes, A. A., & Zweben, A. (2011). Treating Addiction: A Guide for Professionals. New York: Guilford.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2012). Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People to Change (Third Edition). New York: Guilford.
Orford, J. (2001). Excessive Appetites: A Psychological View of Addictions (Second Edition). Chichester: Wiley.
West, R. (2006). Theory of Addiction. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Treatment manuals
Copello, A., Orford, J., Hodgson, R., & Tober, G. (2009). Social Behaviour and Network Therapy for Alcohol Problems. London: Brunner
Routledge.
Graham, H., Copello, A., Birchwood, M., Mueser, K., Orford, J., McGovern, D., ... Georgiou, G. (2004). Cognitive-Behavioural Integrated
Treatment. Chichester: Wiley.
Mason, P., & Butler, C. C. (2010). Health Behaviour Change (Second Edition). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier.
McCrady, B. S., & Epstein, E. E. (2009). Overcoming Alcohol Problems: A Couples-Focused Program. New York: Oxford University Press.
McCrady, B. S., & Epstein, E. E. (2009). Overcoming Alcohol Problems: Workbook for Couples. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mitcheson, L., Maslin, J., Meynen, T., Morrison, T., Hill, R., & Wanigaratne, S. (2010). Applied Cognitive and Behavioural Approaches to the
Treatment of Addiction: A Practical Treatment Guide. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.


Websites
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Institute Library: http://lib.adai.washington.edu/instruments/ This site is a very good resource for assessment
tools.
National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism: http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/clinical-guides-and-manuals
National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA): http://www.drugabuse.gov/publications
Project MATCH: http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/ProjectMatch/matchIntro.htm The three treatment manuals used in project
MATCH in the US are excellent resources and include Motivational Enhancement Therapy, Cognitive Behavioural Coping Skills Therapy
and Twelve Step Facilitation Therapy manuals.
Further reading for clients
A Brief Guide to AA: http://www.aa.org/assets/en_US/p-42_abriefguidetoaa.pdf
Alcoholics Anonymous (aka the 'Big Book') available at http://www.aa.org/pages/en_US/alcoholics-anonymous
Cloud, W., & Granfield, R. (2001). Recovery From Addiction: A Practical Guide to Treatment, Self-Help, and Quitting on Your Own. New York:
New York University Press.
Heather, N., & Robertson, I. (1996). Let's Drink to Your Health. A Self-Help Guide to Sensible Drinking (Second Edition). Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Miller, W., & Munoz, R (2013). Controlling Your Drinking: Tools to Make Moderation Work for You (Second Edition). New York: Guilford.


Further reading for family members
Meyers, R. J., & Wolpe, B. L. (2004). Get Your Loved One Sober: Alternatives to Nagging, Pleading and Threatening. Center City, MN: Hazelden.
Orford, J. (2012). Addiction Dilemmas. Family Experiences in Literature and Research and their Lessons for Practice. Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell.
References
Abbott, P. J., Weller, S. B., Delaney, H. D., & Moore, B. A. (1998). Community reinforcement approach in the treatment of opiate addicts.
American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 24(1), 17-30.
Adams, P. J. (2008). Fragmented Intimacy. Addiction in a Social World. New York: Springer.
Adamson, D., & Ahmed, A. (2011). Addiction and Co-Occurring Disorders from a SMART Recovery Perspective: A Manual for Group
Therapists. Mentor, OH: Alcohol & Drug Abuse Self-Help Network, Inc.
Adamson, S. J., Heather, N., Morton, V., & Raistrick, D. (2010). Initial preference for drinking goal in the treatment of alcohol problems: II.
Treatment Outcomes, 45(2), 136-142.
Alcoholics Anonymous General Service Office. (2013). Estimates of A.A. Groups and Members as of January 1, 2013: Alcoholics
Anonymous.
Alwyn, T., John, B., Hodgson, R. J., & Phillips, C. J. (2004). The addition of a psychological intervention to a home detoxification
programme. Alcohol & Alcoholism, 39(6), 536-541.


American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-
IV-TR). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.
Arkowitz, H., & Miller, W. R. (2008). Learning, applying and extending motivational interviewing. In H. Arkowitz, H. A. Westra, W. R.
Miller, & S. Rollnick (Eds.), Motivational Interviewing in the Treatment of Psychological Problems (pp. 1-25). New York: Guilford.
Babor, T. F., Higgins-Biddle, J. C., Saunders, J. B., & Monteiro, M. G. (2001). AUDIT: The Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test. Guidelines for
Use in Primary Health Care. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
Baker, A., Lee, N. K., Claire, M., Lewin, T. J., Grant, R., Pohlman, S., ... Carr, V. J. (2005). Brief cognitive behavioural interventions for regular
amphetamine users: A step in the right direction. Addiction, 100, 367-378.
Beattie, M. C., Longabaugh, R., Elliott, G., Stout, R., Fava, J., & Noel, N. E. (1993). Effect of the social environment on alcohol involvement
and subjective well-being prior to alcoholism treatment. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 54(3), 283-296.
Beck, A. T., Wright, F. D., Newman, C. F., & Liese, B. S. (1993). Cognitive Therapy of Substance Abuse. London: Guilford Press.
Beckman, L. J. (1980). An attributional analysis of alcoholics anonymous. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 41, 714-726.
Buckner, J. D., & Schmidt, N. B. (2009). A randomized pilot study of motivation enhancement therapy to increase utilization of cognitive-
behavioural therapy for social anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47(8), 710-715.
Budney, A., & Higgins, S. (1998). A Community Reinforcement Plus Vouchers Approach: Treating Cocaine Addiction. Rockville, MD: National
Institute on Drug Abuse. Retrieved from http://archives.drugabuse.gov/pdf/CRA.pdf
Burke, B. L., Arkowitz, H., & Menchola, M. (2003). The efficacy of Motivational Interviewing: a meta-analysis of controlled clinical trials.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 843-861.


Calabria, B., Degenhardt, L., Briegleb, C., Vos, T., Hall, W., Lynskey, M., ... McLaren, J. (2010). Systematic review of prospective studies
investigating "remission" from amphetamine, cannabis, cocaine or opioid dependence. Addictive Behaviours, 35(8), 741-749.
Cartwright, A.K.J. (1980). The attitudes of helping agents towards the alcoholic client: The influence of experience, support, training,
and self-esteem. British Journal of Addiction, 75(4), 413-431.
Constantino, M. J., DeGeorge, J., Dadlani, M. B., & Overtree, C. E. (2009). Motivational interviewing: A bellwether for context-responsive
psychotherapy integration. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65(11), 1246-1253.
Cook, S., Heather, N., & McCambridge, J. (2014). Post-treatment motivation and outcome 9 months later. Findings from structural
equation modelling. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 83(1), 232-237.
Copello, A., & Orford, J. (2002). Addiction and the family: Is it time for services to take notice of the evidence? Addiction, 97, 1361-1363.
Copello, A., Orford, J., Hodgson, R., & Tober, G. (2009). Social Behaviour and Network Therapy for Alcohol Problems. London: Routledge.
Copello, A., Templeton, L., Orford, J., & Velleman, R. (2010a). The 5-Step Method: Evidence of gains for affected family members. Drugs:
Education, Prevention, and Policy, 17(s1), 100-112.
Copello, A., Templeton, L., Orford, J., & Velleman, R. (2010b). The 5-Step Method: Principles and practice. Drugs: Education, Prevention,
and Policy, 17(s1), 86-99.
Copello, A. G., Templeton, L., & Velleman, R. (2006). Family interventions for drug and alcohol misuse: is there a best practice? Current
Opinion in Psychiatry, 19, 271-276.
Copello, A., Velleman, R., & Templeton, L. (2005). Family interventions in the treatment of alcohol and drug problems. Drug and Alcohol
Review, 24(4), 369-385.
Copello, A., Williamson, E., Orford, J., & Day, E. (2006). Implementing and evaluating social behaviour and network therapy in drug
treatment practice in the UK: A feasibility study. Addictive Behaviours, 31(5), 802-810.


Dawson, D. A., Grant, B. F., Stinson, F. S., Chou, P. S., Huang, B., & Ruan, W. J. (2005). Recovery from DSM-IV alcohol dependence: United
States, 2001-2002. Addiction, 100(3), 281-292.
Day, E., Copello, A., Seddon, J., Christie, M., Bamber, D., Powell, C, ... Freemantle, N. (2013). Pilot study of a social network intervention for
heroin users in opiate substitution treatment: Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials, 14(1), 264.
Day, E., Gaston, R. L., Furlong, E., Murali, V., & Copello, A. (2005). UK substance misuse treatment workers' attitudes to twelve-step self-
help groups. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 29, 321-327.
Donovan, D. M., Ingalsbe, M. H., Benbow, J., & Daley, D. C. (2013). 12-Step interventions and mutual support programs for substance use
disorders: An overview. Social Work in Public Health, 28(3-4), 313-332.
Drummond, C. (1990). The relationship between alcohol dependence and alcohol related problems in a clinical population. British
Journal of Addiction, 85, 357-366.
Edwards, G., & Gross, M. M. (1976). Alcohol dependence: Provisional description of a clinical syndrome. British Medical Journal, 1, 1058-
1061.
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA). (2013). National Report for United Kingdom, United Kingdom Focal
Point on Drugs. London: Author.
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA). (2014). European Drug Report: Trends and Developments. Lisbon,
Portugal: Author.
Ferri, M., Amato, L., & Davoli, M. (2006). Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12-step programmes for alcohol dependence. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews (3), CD005032.
Finney, J. W., & Monahan, S. C. (1996). The cost-effectiveness of treatment for alcoholism: A second approximation. Journal of Studies on
Alcohol, 57, 229-243.
Galanter, M. (1999). Network Therapy for Alcohol and Drug Abuse. New York: Guilford.

Graham, H. L., Maslin, J., Copello, A., Birchwood, M. J., Mueser, K. T., McGovern, D., & Georgiou, G. (2001). Drug and alcohol problems
amongst individuals with severe mental health problems in an inner city area of the UK. Journal of Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology, 36, 448-455.
Hasin, D. S., O'Brien, C. P., Auriacombe, M., Borges, G., Bucholz, K., Budney, A., ... Grant, B. F. (2013). DSM-5 criteria for substance use
disorders: Recommendations and rationale. American Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 834-851.
Havassy, B. E., Hall, S. M., & Wasserman, D. A. (1991). Social support and relapse: Commonalities among alcoholics, opiate users, and
cigarette smokers. Addictive Behaviors, 16, 235-246.
Hawton, K., Harriss, L., & Zahl, D. (2006). Deaths from all causes in a long-term follow-up study of 11 583 deliberate self-harm patients.
Psychological Medicine, 36(3), 397-405.
Health and Social Care Information Centre. (2013). Statistics on Alcohol: England, 2013. London: HSCIC.
Heather, N. (2005). Motivational interviewing: Is it all our clients need? Addiction Research and Theory, 13(1), 1-18.
Heather, N., & Hönekopp, J. (2008). A revised edition of the Readiness to Change Questionnaire (Treatment Version). Addiction Research
and Theory, 16, 421-433.
Heather, N., Luce, A., Peck, D., Dunbar, B., & James, I. (1999). Development of a treatment version of the Readiness to Change
Questionnaire. Addiction Research, 7(1), 63-83.
Hettema, J., Steele, J., & Miller, W. R. (2005). Motivational interviewing. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 91-111.
Holder, H., Longabaugh, R., Miller, W. R., & Rubonis, A. V. (1991). The cost-effectiveness of treatment for alcoholism: a first
approximation. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 52, 517-540.
Horvath, A. T., & Yeterian, J. (2012). Smart recovery: Self-empowering, science-based addiction recovery support. Journal of Groups in
Addiction & Recovery, 7(2-4), 102-117.
Humphreys, K. (2004). Circles of Recovery: Self-Help Organizations for Addiction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.


Humphreys, K., Wing, S., McCarty, D., Chappel, J., Gallant, L., Haberle, B., ... Weiss, R. (2004). Self-help organizations for alcohol and drug
problems: Toward evidence-based practice and policy. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 26, 151-158.
Hunt, D. E., Strug, D. L., Goldsmith, D. S., Lipton, D. S., Robertson, K., & Truitt, L. (1986). Alcohol use and abuse: Heavy drinking among
methadone clients. The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 12(1-2), 147-164.
Irvin, J. E., Bowers, C. A., Dunn, M. E., & Wang, M. C. (1999). Efficacy of relapse prevention: a meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 67(4), 563-570.
Jackson, R., Johnson, M., Campbell, F., Messina, J., Guillaume, L., Meier, P., ... Payne, N. (2010). Screening and Brief Intervention for
Prevention and Early Identification of Alcohol Use Disorder in Adults and Young People. Sheffield: University of Sheffield, School of Health
and Related Research (SCHARR) Public Health Collaborating Centre.
Johnstone, L., & Dallos, R. (2013). Formulation in Psychology and Psychotherapy. London: Routledge.
Kelly, J. F. (2003). Self-help for substance-use disorders: history, effectiveness, knowledge gaps, and research opportunities. Clinical
Psychology Review, 23(5), 639-663.
Kelly, J. F., Magill, M., & Stout, R. L. (2009). How do people recover from alcohol dependence? A systematic review on mechanisms of
behaviour change in Alcoholics Anonymous. Addiction Research and Theory, 17(3), 236-259.
Litt, M. D., Kadden, R. M., Kabela-Cormier, E., & Petry, N. (2009). Changing network support for drinking: network support project 2-year
follow-up. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(2), 229-242.
Longabaugh, R., Wirtz, P. W., Zweben, A., & Stout, R. L. (1998). Network support for drinking, Alcoholics Anonymous and long-term
matching effects. Addiction, 93(9), 1313-1333.
Lundahl, B., & Burke, B. L. (2009). The effectiveness and applicability of motivational interviewing. A practice friendly review of four
meta-analyses. Journal of Clinical psychology, 65(11), 1232-1245.


Lundahl, B., Tollefson, D., Kunz, C., Brownell, C., & Burke, B. L. (2010). Meta-analysis of motivational interviewing. Twenty five years of
empirical studies. Research on Social Work Practice, 20(2), 137-160.
Maisto, S. A., Kirouac, M., & Witkiewitz, K. (2014). Alcohol use disorder clinical course research: Informing clinicians' treatment
planning now and in the future. Journal of Studies in Alcohol Drugs, 75, 799-807.
Manning, V., Best, D., Faulkner, N., Titherington, E., Morinana, A., Keaney, F., ... Strang, J. (2012). Does active referral by a doctor or 12-
Step peer improve 12-Step meeting attendance? Results from a pilot randomised control trial. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 126(1-2),
131-137.
Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (1985). Relapse Prevention: Maintenance Strategies in the Treatment of Addictive Behaviours. New York:
Guilford.
Mason, P., & Butler, C. C. (2010). Health Behaviour Change (Second Edition). London: Churchill Livingstone.
May, J., Andrade, J., Panabokke, N., & Kavanagh, D. (2004). Images of desire: Cognitive models of craving. Memory, 12, 447-461.
McCrady, B. S. (2004). To have but one true friend: Implications for practice of research on alcohol use disorders and social networks.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviours, 18(2), 113-121.
McCrady, B. S. (2006). Alcohol and other substance-use problems. In A. Carr & M. McNulty (Eds.), Handbook of Adult Clinical Psychology:
An Evidence Based Practice Approach (pp. 766-840). London: Routledge.
McCrady, B. S., & Epstein, E. (2009). Overcoming Alcohol Problems: A Couples-Focused Program. New York: Oxford University Press.
Meyers, R. J., & Miller, W. R. (2001). A Community Reinforcement Approach to Addiction Treatment. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Meyers, R. J., & Smith, J. E. (1995). Clinical Guide to Alcohol Treatment: The Community Reinforcement Approach. New York: Guilford Press.
Miller, W. R., Brown, J. M., Simpson, T. L., Handmaker, N. S., Bien, T. H., Luckie, L. F., ... Tonigan, J. Scott. (1995). What works? A
methodological analysis of the alcohol treatment outcome literature. In R. K. Hester & W. R. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of Alcoholism
Treatment Approaches: Effective Alternatives (pp. 12-44). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Allyn and Bacon.


Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (1991). Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People to Change Addictive Behaviour. New York: Guilford.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2012). Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People to Change (Third Edition). New York: Guilford.
Miller, W. R., & Sanchez, V. C. (1993). Motivating young adults for treatment and lifestyle change. In G. Howard (Ed.), Issues in Alcohol Use
and Misuse by Young Adults (pp. 55-82). Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Mitcheson, L., Maslin, J., Meynen, T., Morrison, T., Hill, R., & Wanigaratne, S. (2010). Applied Cognitive and Behavioural Approaches to the
Treatment of Addiction: A Practical Treatment Guide. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Mohr, C. D., Averna, S., Kenny, D. A., & Del Boa, F. K. (2001). "Getting by (or getting high) with a little help from my friends": An
examination of adult alcoholics' friendships. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 62, 637-645.
Monti, P. M., Kadden, R. M., Rohsenow, D. J., Cooney, N. L., & Abrams, D. B. (2002). Treating Alcohol Dependence: A Coping Skills Training
Guide. New York: Guilford.
Musser, P. H., & Murphy, C. M. (2009). Motivational interviewing with perpetrators of intimate partner abuse. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 65, 1218-1231.
National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. (2008). Drug Misuse: Psychosocial Interventions. London: British Psychological Society
and The Royal College of Psychiatrists.
National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. (2011). Alcohol-Use Disorders: The NICE Guideline on Diagnosis, Assessment and
Management of Harmful Drinking and Alcohol Dependence. London: The British Psychological Society and The Royal College of
Psychiatrists.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2014). Nalmefene for reducing alcohol consumption in people with alcohol
dependence. NICE Technology Appraisal Guidance: NICE.
Office for National Statistics. (2011). General Lifestyle Survey Overview: A Report on the 2009 General Lifestyle Survey. London: ONS.

Orford, J. (2008). Asking the right questions in the right way: the need for a shift in research on psychological treatments for addiction.
Addiction, 103(6), 875-885.
Orford, J., Copello, A., Velleman, R., & Templeton, L. (2010). Family members affected by a close relative's addiction: The stress-strain-
coping support model. Drugs: Education, Prevention and Policy, 17(S1), 36-43.
Orford, J., Hodgson, R., Copello, A., John, B., Smith, M., Black, R., ... UKATT Research Team. (2006). The clients' perspective on change
during treatment for an alcohol problem: qualitative analysis of follow-up interviews in the UK Alcohol Treatment Trial. Addiction,
101(1), 60-68.
Orford, J., Natera, G., Copello, A., Atkinson, C., Mora, J., Velleman, R., ... Walley, G. (2005). Coping with Alcohol and Drug Problems: The
Experiences of Family Members in Three Contrasting Cultures. London: Brunner-Routledge.
Padesky, C. A., & Mooney, K. A. (1990). Clinical Tip: Presenting the cognitive model to clients. International Cognitive Therapy Newsletter,
6, 13-14.
Pollack, M. H., Penava, S. A., Bolton, E., Worthington, J., III, Allen, G. L., Farach, F. J., Jr, & Otto, M. W. (2002). A novel cognitive-behavioural
approach for treatment-resistant drug dependence. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 23(4), 335-342.
Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1982). Transtheoretical therapy: Toward a more integrative model of change. Psychotherapy: Theory
Research and Practice, 19(3), 276-288.
Project MATCH Research Group. (1997). Matching alcoholism treatments to client heterogeneity: Project MATCH post treatment
drinking outcomes. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58(1), 7-29.
Raistrick, D., Bradshaw, J., Tober, G., Weiner, J., Allison, J., & Healey, C. (1994). Development of the Leeds Dependence Questionnaire
(LDQ): a questionnaire to measure alcohol and opiate dependence in the context of a treatment evaluation package. Addiction, 89, 563-
572.


Ray, G. T., Mertens, J. R., & Weisner, C. (2007). The excess medical cost and health problems of family members of persons diagnosed with
alcohol or drug problems. Medical Care, 45, 116-122.
Ray, G. T., Mertens, J. R., & Weisner, C. (2009). Family members of people with alcohol or drug dependence: health problems and medical
cost compared to family members of people with diabetes and asthma. Addiction, 104, 203-214.
Regier, D. A., Farmer, M. E., Rae, D. S., Locke, B. Z., Keith, S. J., Judd, L. L., & Goodwin, F. K. (1990). Comorbidity of mental disorders with
alcohol and other drug abuse. Results from the epidemiologic catchment area (ECA) study. Journal of the American Medical Association,
264, 2511-2518.
Rogers, C. (1951). Client-Centred Therapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Rollnick, S., Butler, C. C., Kinnersley, P., Gregory, J., & Mash, B. (2010). Motivational interviewing. British Medical Journal, 340, 1242-1245.
Rollnick, S., Butler, C., & Scott, N. (1997). Helping smokers make decisions: the enhancement of brief intervention for general medical
practice. Patient Education and Counselling, 31(3), 191-203.
Rollnick, S., & Miller, W. R. (2008). Motivational Interviewing in Health Care: Helping Patients Change Behaviour. New York: Guilford Press.
Schuckit, M. (2005). Drug and Alcohol Abuse: A Clinical Guide to Diagnosis and Treatment (Sixth Edition). New York: Springer.
Simpson, D. D., Joe, G. W., Broome, K. M., Hiller, M. L., Knight, K., & Rowan-Szal, G. A. (1997). Program diversity and treatment retention
rates in the Drug Abuse Treatment Outcome Study. Psychology of Addictive Behaviours, 11(4), 279-293.
Singleton, N., Meltzer, H., & Gatward, R. (1998). Psychiatric Morbidity Among Prisoners in England and Wales. London: Her Majesty's
Stationery Office.
Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1996). Timeline Followback User's Guide: A Calendar Method for Assessing Alcohol and Drug Use. Toronto,
Canada: Addiction Research Foundation.
Stephens, R. S., Roffman, R. A., & Cutlin, L. (2000). Comparison of extended versus brief treatments for marijuana use. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 898-908.


Stockwell, T., Murphy, D., & Hodgson, R. (1983). The Severity of Alcohol Dependence Questionnaire: Its use, reliability and validity.
British Journal of Addiction, 78, 145-155.
Sullivan, J. T., Sykora, K., Schniderman, J., Naranjo, C. A., & Sellers, E. M. (1989). Assessment of alcohol withdrawal: the Revised Clinical
Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol Scale (CIWA-Ar). British Journal of Addiction, 84, 1353-1357.
UKATT Research Team. (2005a). Cost effectiveness of treatment for alcohol problems: findings of the randomised UK alcohol treatment
trial (UKATT). British Medical Journal, 331(7516), 544-548.
UKATT Research Team. (2005b). Effectiveness of treatment for alcohol problems: findings of the randomised UK alcohol treatment trial
(UKATT). British Medical Journal, 331(7516), 541-544.
Vasilaki, E., Hosier, S., & Cox, W. (2006). The efficacy of motivational interviewing as a brief intervention for excessive drinking: A meta-
analytic review. Alcohol & Alcoholism, 41, 328-335.
Vederhus, J., Kristensen, O., Laudet, A., & Clausen, T. (2009). Attitudes towards 12-step groups and referral practices in a 12-step naive
treatment culture; a survey of addiction professionals in Norway. BMC Health Services Research, 9, 147. doi:10.1186/1472-6963-9-147
Volkow, N. D. (2004). The reality of comorbidity: Depression and drug abuse. Biological Psychiatry, 56, 714-717.
Vorma, H., Naukkarinen, H., Sarna, S., & Kuoppa, K. (2002). Treatment of out-patients with complicated benzodiazepine dependence:
comparison of two approaches. Addiction, 97, 851-859.
Wanigaratne, S., Wallace, W., Pullin, J., Keaney, F., & Farmer, R. (1990). Relapse Prevention for Addictive Behaviours. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Science.
Wasserman, D. A., Stewart, A. L., & Delucchi, K. L. (2001). Social support and abstinence from opiates and cocaine during opioid
maintenance treatment. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 65, 65-75.


Weaver, T., Madden, P., Charles, V., Timso, G. S., Renton, A., Tyrer, P., ... On Behalf of the Comorbidity of Substance Misuse and Mental
Illness Collaborative (COSMIC) Study Team. (2003). Comorbidity of substance misuse and mental illness in community mental health
and substance misuse services. British Journal of Psychiatry, 183, 304–313.
Witkiewitz, K., & Marlatt, G. A. (2004). Relapse prevention for alcohol and drug problems—That was Zen, this is Tao. American
Psychologist, 59(4), 224–235.
Witkiewitz, K., Marlatt, A., & Walker, D. (2005). Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for alcohol and substance use disorders. Journal of
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 19(3), 211–228.
Witkiewitz, K., & Masyn, K. E. (2008). Drinking trajectories following an initial lapse. Psychology of Addictive Behaviours, 22(2), 157–167.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and
Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2014). Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health 2014. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press.


Chapter 25 Psychosis
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty
DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-25
Psychosis refers to conditions characterized by positive symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations; negative symptoms such as
diminished affective expression and reduced goal-directed behaviour; and disorganized thinking and behaviour (Cook, 2014; French et al.,
2010; Lieberman & Murray, 2012; Mueser & Jeste, 2008; Tiffin & Welsh, 2013; Weinberger & Harrison, 2011). The symptoms of psychosis
are given in Table 25.1. In widely used classification systems such as ICD-10 (WHO-1992) and DSM-5 (APA, 2013), psychosis is an umbrella
term that covers a range of conditions including schizophrenia and other schizophrenia spectrum disorders, which share similar symptoms
and genetic aetiology with schizophrenia, but vary in duration, severity and the presence of additional mood symptoms (as detailed in the
next section on diagnosis and classification). The case study presented in this chapter illustrates that psychosis is a debilitating condition
which compromises the capacity to carry out normal activities. While some people with brief psychoses recover, for a large proportion of
individuals psychosis (and schizophrenia in particular) is a chronic relapsing condition with incomplete remission between episodes. The
symptoms of schizophrenia typically first appear in late adolescence or early adulthood, wax and wane over the life course, and have a
profound long-term effect on those who experience psychosis and their families. Schizophrenia is one of the most debilitating psychological
disorders, affecting people's capacity to live independently, make and maintain satisfying relationships, engage in family life, work

productively and enjoy leisure activities. Rates of school problems, unemployment, homelessness and imprisonment are very high among
people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Although just under 1% of people meet the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, the World Health
Organization has ranked it as second only to cardiovascular disease in terms of overall disease burden internationally (Murray & Lopez,
1996). Despite these gloomy facts, scientific advances in our understanding of psychotic symptoms and schizophrenia, and advances in both
pharmacological and psychological approaches to treatment are making it increasingly possible for people diagnosed with schizophrenia to
live far more productive lives that was previously possible.
In this chapter an illustrative case study will first be presented. Then, after considering the diagnosis, classification, clinical features,
and epidemiology of schizophrenia (and related psychoses), a variety of theoretical explanations concerning the aetiology of the conditions
subsumed under this label will be considered along with relevant empirical evidence. An approach to the assessment and treatment of
psychosis in will then be given.
Case study
Brian was a 34-year-old single man who had been attending mental health services since his late teens. He had initially presented to the
community mental health team aged 19 with voice-hearing experiences and paranoid thinking in the context of heavy cannabis use and
drinking. He spent time in hospital and was diagnosed with drug-induced psychosis. He completed a degree in sociology and thereafter had
a succession of temporary employments in bars and restaurants as a waiter. Three times during his twenties, symptoms of voice hearing and
paranoid thinking returned in the absence of substance use, and he had three more hospital admissions for 1-4 months each. His diagnosis
was changed to schizophrenia. His ability to work was limited during his twenties. When not in hospital he experienced long periods of
low mood and anxiety, during which times he would isolate himself for weeks in a bedsit apartment with minimal contact with family and
friends. He also had periods where his mood and anxiety improved and he would once again return to temporary employment. However, he

found it increasingly difficult to find paid work. He supported himself with social welfare payments, with some additional financial support
at intervals from his father, for example to pay for an education course or a trip. Brian was key worked since his last admission about 12
months previously by a community mental health nurse, including domiciliary visits at his bedsit and attempts to engage him in treatment.
He made repeated requests to see a psychologist for cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), which he had heard was an effective treatment.
Table 25.1 Positive symptoms, negative symptoms and disorganization which occur in psychosis
Category
Symptoms
Description
Positive symptoms Delusions
A firmly held belief for which there is no evidence or which is not
accepted by other members of the person's culture. Common delusions in
psychosis include the following: Persecutory: That one will be harmed
Control: That some force is controlling the self Referential: That cues or
comments are directed at the self Grandiose: That one has exceptional
abilities, wealth, fame or significance Somatic: That part of the body has
an unusual function or is unhealthy Thought withdrawal: That some
force has removed one's thoughts Thought insertion: That some force
has inserted thoughts into one's mind Thought broadcasting: That
one's thoughts are being broadcast out loud so others can hear them
Erotomanic: That another person is in love with the self Delusional
jealousy: That one's romantic partner is unfaithful

Hallucinations
A vivid perception-like experience (e.g. hearing voices or seeing visions)
in the absence of a corresponding external stimulus. The person may or
may not have insight into the non-veridical nature of the hallucination.
Delusions may develop to explain the hallucinations (e.g. the TV station
is controlling me by beaming electricity into my pelvis, and I can feel
this). Hallucinations may take various forms: Auditory: Hallucinations
of sounds, usually hearing voices Visual: Hallucinations of images,
usually people but occasionally unformed images such as flashes of
light Geometric: Hallucinations of tunnels, spirals, lattices or cobwebs
Tactile: Hallucinations of being touched, shocked, or something
crawling under the skin Somatic: Hallucinations of physical experiences
within the body, for example electricity Olfactory: Hallucination
of odours such as burning rubber or decaying flesh Gustatory:
Hallucination of tastes, usually unpleasant
Negative symptoms Diminished emotional expression Decreased verbal and non-verbal expression of emotions with the voice,
Avolition
Alogia
Anhedonia
Asociality
Disorganization Formal thought disorder
face, and hands. Also referred to as blunted or flattened affect.
Decreased purposeful goal-directed activity
Decreased speech output
Decreased capacity to experience pleasure or recall pleasantness of
positive events
Lack of interest in social activities
Disorganized thinking shown by incoherent switching from one topic to
another (derailment or loose associations) and difficulty maintaining a

coherent train of thought from A to B
Disorganized behaviour
Catatonic behaviour
Difficulty organizing, planning and completing activities of daily living
Decreased reactivity to the environment shown by lack or verbal
or motor responses (stupor), little speech (mutism), resistance to
instructions (negativism), maintaining self-imposed bizarre rigid
postures (posturing) or externally imposed postures (waxy flexibility),
purposeless excessive motor activity (catatonic excitement), repetitive
movements (stereotypy), mimicking others speech (echolalia), or
mimicking others movements (echopraxia)
At psychological assessment, Brian outlined how he grew up as the second oldest in a family of five, with an older brother and three younger
sisters. His parents were married but he described them as not happily so. His mother's family did not approve of her marriage to his father,
who was from Asia and who distanced themselves from her and her new family. Brian had little contact with maternal or paternal extended
family while growing up. He went to state primary and secondary schools, describing himself as funny, outgoing and sensitive. He said he
clashed frequently with his father at home who tried to impose strict discipline on his sons and wanted them to achieve academically. He
said that looking back he could see that his mother was likely depressed through much of his childhood years, although he never heard this
named or acknowledged. She had few friends and did not go out much. She was home a lot and often appeared unhappy and tired. There
were periods where she stayed in bed and was obviously distressed and crying. Her husband, by Brian's recall, was unsure of how to respond
to her distress and was more often irritated by it and ignored it. When Brian was in his early teens, he began drinking alcohol and smoking
cannabis. This increased tensions with his father. He thought he underachieved in final school exams and even more so in college, barely
completing his degree with low marks. Brian had hazy recall of the events preceding his first hospitalization and said he did not like to talk

about it. He spoke about his most recent admission, saying that he had been becoming unwell over a period of months, staying in his flat for
extended periods sleeping during the day and being up at night. He had regularly experienced voices saying nasty things about him and that
others wanted to hurt him. He also began to distrust family members who visited or called, believing they did not have his best interests at
heart. He developed a belief that his father was trying to poison his mother by replacing some of her blood pressure tablets with toxic
medication. He confided this fear to one of his sisters who was alarmed, broke his confidence and told his father. Further rows ensued about
Brian's mental health. His family insisted he was unwell and needed hospitalization. Brian continued to maintain that he had no mental
health problems. This conflict left him feeling isolated and under attack. His suspiciousness broadened so that he began to feel that others in
the neighbourhood were planning to harm him, for example the owner of a local business and a neighbour. He got into a row with this
neighbour on the street near his house, culminating in Brian causing damage to a parked car with a baseball bat, which he had begun to carry
for protection. Following treatment in hospital, Brian indicated that he finally understood and accepted that he had an illness and needed to
commit to taking medication indefinitely. He said he had also committed to abstaining from substance use but over the following 6 months
had returned to drinking beer, sometimes with friends but more often alone in his flat in the evenings. At the time of discharge he was
offered 3 weeks in the Day Hospital, which he attended for 3 days before disengaging. He was also offered a place on the vocational
rehabilitation training course, which he declined, saying that he would prefer to return to work and planned to begin looking for jobs.
Brian described a current life pattern of getting up at about 10 a.m., sometimes later. He had no structured daily activities. He wished
to become healthier but rarely felt motivated enough to exercise. He smoked heavily, but wanted to quit. His diet was poor, partly because
he rarely went shopping, and partly because he frequently ran out of money for food. He had achieved lifeguard and swimming teacher
qualifications in his twenties. He had previously worked a zero-contract-hours position at local swimming pools, filling in on an occasional
basis when the pools were short-staffed. However, he found himself becoming paranoid on the journey to work or while working, and found
the whole experience of lifeguarding and teaching pressurizing and stressful. Brian had ideas about wanting to return to education but was
unclear about what he should study and had no funding for further courses. A hearing voices group was being established in the area around

the time that Brian was referred to our psychology service at a university teaching hospital, and Brian was invited to attend this. However,
he expressed a preference for only an individual intervention.
At interview Brian was casually dressed and unshaven. He smelled strongly of cigarette smoke. He was articulate and pleasant to talk
to, asking for CBT and willing and able to give a coherent and comprehensive history. He noted that he'd never been offered psychological
treatment despite attending services for 15 years. He pointed out, with some irritation, how long he had been asking for and been denied
this service, and how long he had had to wait. He noted that even since last being discharged from hospital, he had been doing less well, and
wished he had more help sooner. His frustration with the delay in receiving psychological services was acknowledged. Asked about what
help specifically he wanted or what he had read about CBT, he was less clear, but gave general examples of wanting a better life than being at
home for extended periods in his bedsit, too afraid to go out. He asked for tips to deal with anxiety. I put it to him that weekly appointments
of CBT with the rest of his week spent at home in his flat would be unlikely to help him. I asked him to commit to re-establishing some
structured daily activity, and discussed with him pros and cons of a range of options, including part-time work, study, volunteering, or
a public health service-funded rehabilitation course focused on helping mental health service-users return to work. I offered him referral
to the team occupational therapist (OT) to assist him in this planning. Brian was adamant that he did not want to go to the vocational
rehabilitation course or attend OT, saying that he would find his own job. He agreed to contact me for an initial appointment when he had
20 hours of activity set up. Three months later, Brian got back in touch. He was working in a café-bar for 12-15 hours a week. Weekly CBT
sessions were begun with an agreed focus of working on reducing anxiety. He also agreed to commit to engaging in physical exercise for an
additional period each week.
Brian noted that some days he felt able to go out to work or to the shops without too much difficulty, but when out on other days he had
overwhelming urges to get home to his flat. His flat was his place of safety and also where he kept his benzodiazepine medication that he used
on an 'as-needed basis'. Looking at what triggered anxiety, over the course of a number of sessions Brian disclosed how anxiety often was
preceded by him observing a series of colours in sequence, for example seeing someone on the street with a blue scarf followed by someone

else with a yellow tie. Brian could not say why these colours were significant, but blue followed by yellow to him meant impending disaster.
Given this meaning, his reaction with high anxiety and urges to get home to safety was understandable. At other times he had a sense that
strangers in public were communicating with each other, and tried unsuccessfully to identify the content of this communication. Usually
this perceived communication felt sinister and threatening, as though Brian were being left out of something important. This was also
followed by heighted anxiety and urges to get home.
A formulation for these anxiety problems was created with Brian, identifying how at times of decreased self-care and increased demands
on himself he was susceptible to the experience of hyper-meaning making, that is, that many unrelated things began to feel connected in a
way that felt overwhelming and sinister. He typically responded to this with a full-blown anxiety fight or flight response with physical
symptoms of sweating, nausea, shaking, and a sense of being paralyzed and unable to think or act. Cognitive effects of this anxiety included
his attention narrowing to the threat to the exclusion of all else and his thoughts were catastrophic, such as 'I can't cope' and 'my head's going
to explode' rapidly escalating anxiety further. His behavioural responses were to leave the situation as fast as possible, reach for medication
or alcohol to calm himself, and subsequent procrastination about or avoidance of returning to such situations. The key role of avoidance in
maintaining and escalating anxiety and of graded exposure in reducing anxiety were outlined to him. In addition, the meaning he made of
the original experience of things being connected as sinister and of himself as unable to cope was examined and reframed. Rather than
saying to himself, 'this sinister situation is happening again and I have to get away for my safety,' he was encouraged to create alternative
responses, such as 'here comes the too-many-connections thing again. This is scary but usually means I'm feeling stressed or
overstimulated.' Improving self-care and increasing positive activities were introduced as ways to help Brian respond empathically and
effectively to his anxiety. Sessions were spent looking in detail at ways to improve his self-care, with the idea of 'a healthy mind in a healthy
body'. SMART goals (specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and time-limited) were introduced, so that for example one week he set a goal
of eating breakfast three mornings in the week before 9.30 a.m., and of cycling for 20 minutes on two evenings in the week. He engaged in a
brainstorming exercise to generate a list of positive activities in which he could engage within his limited budget. This process widened his

set of activities from 'have a smoke' and 'have a beer' to include 'call a friend on Skype,' 'go for a bike ride,' and 'meet someone after work for
a coffee.' Brian agreed after about 10 sessions to more honestly and seriously look at his alcohol and cannabis use and its role in his life. A
pros and cons list was generated. He found it easy to reel off and write down the cons of drinking and the pros of not drinking, as mental
health professionals and his family had been repeating these for years, but he did not have any emotional response to these. However, when
writing about the pros of drinking and the cons of not drinking he became much more emotionally connected, noting his sense of not being
equal to many others in his life, of being ground down by all the problems he had, and of being vulnerable and sensitive, all of which alcohol
helped him to distance himself from. Taking stock more seriously of the issues that led him to drink and the issues he drank to escape from
was a helpful and positive intervention. When I validated how difficult his life has been and continued to be with interruptions to his work
and plans through being unwell and in hospital, the challenge of living on such a fixed low income indefinitely, how alone and left behind he
sometimes felt, he expressed his sense of being understood, but also his commitment to wanting to address these issues, rather than merely
cover over them or escape them through drinking. He recommitted to a 3-month trial of sobriety, less than the 6-month trial I suggested,
after which he agreed to reassess if his life was on balance better or worse.
Brian got some more contract work as a swimming teacher but only received his schedule at the end of each week. This made scheduling
appointments difficult, but efforts were made to see him weekly or nearly weekly to support him in returning to this work. His main goal was
to stick with the job, and manage and tolerate anxiety that emerged in his work situation. Despite several periods where Brian felt he needed
to quit and nearly did, he managed to stay in work, with a day or two of work missed on a few occasions over the next 3 months. This success
of sticking with it was regularly celebrated. A second goal of monitoring his daily self-care was established, so that Brian wrote down what
he ate, how much he exercised, his urges to drink and his actual drinking on a daily basis. This gave him a lot of information, much of which
surprised him, but helped him to improve his self-care over 3 months.
Brian was asked if he might like to consider again attending the hearing voices group. He was directed to the Hearing Voices Network
Ireland website and to audio and video materials including 'The Voices in My Head' TED talk by Eleanor Longden. After reviewing the

materials, Brain expressed interest in the group. He identified with the idea that he was an 'expert by experience' and could recognize that
he had come a distance since his late teens when first encountering services. He wondered if he might be able to 'give something back'
to a younger person struggling with a diagnosis as he had previously struggled. Brian began to attend the group, at first intermittently
and gradually more regularly. After attending the group for 5 months, the opportunity to participate in training as a hearing voices group
facilitator came up, but Brian declined this.
Around this time, there were two significant bereavements in Brian's family: his 4-year-old niece died in an accident and his mother died
from cancer following a short illness. This was hugely distressing for all the family and for Brian. Some tensions between Brian and his father
and older brother re-emerged around the time of his mother's illness, as Brian felt that he was not included and consulted but marginalized
and patronized. Time in sessions was spent in helping Brian in his interactions with his family and in supporting him with his grief. The
losses also brought other losses to his mind, particularly lost intimate relationships, most of which had broken down as a direct consequence
of his being unwell. Brian was able to access feelings of vulnerability and loss and feel understood and supported in this. Throughout this
period, although he was clearly distressed and suffering, he did not relapse but maintained employment and good self-care.
About 18 months following the start of his work with me, Brian was offered the opportunity to get involved in an uncle's business as an
assistant manager with a view to possibly taking on a more senior role later. The job offered him a 2-year contract and a significantly higher
regular income but required him to move countries. Brian asked for assistance with making contact with local mental health services in the
new location. A discharge letter was written and shared with Brian, and sent to the new treating team.
Like most service-users with psychosis throughout his psychological treatment, Brian was on maintenance antipsychotic medication.
This was reviewed by a consultant psychiatrist at the university teaching hospital mental health service where this psychological
intervention occurred. This oral medication was taken daily. Since his acceptance of his psychosis Brian showed good compliance. Over the
18 months of psychological treatment, Brian's progress and recovery was sufficient for a reduction in medication to be considered. However,

it was decided not to reduce medication because of the stresses (and vulnerability to relapse) associated with his bereavements, and change
of residence and employment.
Diagnosis and classification
Diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia are given in Table 25.2. The marked variability among people diagnosed with schizophrenia in
symptomatology, course, treatment response and possible aetiological factors has led to the identification of different subtypes of
schizophrenia. In ICD-10 the main subtypes of schizophrenia are defined in terms of the most prominent symptoms. Distinctions are made
between paranoid, hebephrenic and catatonic schizophrenia (as well as a number of other less clearly defined categories). In paranoid
schizophrenia, paranoid delusions, usually accompanied by auditory hallucinations, are the most prominent symptoms. In hebephrenic
schizophrenia, diminished or inappropriate affective expression is the predominant symptom, coupled with formal thought disorder or
avolition. In catatonic schizophrenia, either retarded or excited catatonic behaviour is the principal feature. Similar distinctions between
subtypes of schizophrenia, which date back to Emil Kraepelin's (1899) seminal work, made in earlier versions of the DSM were dropped
in DSM-5. Research has shown that these subtypes are not consistently differentiated by family history, course, prognosis or treatment
response.
In contrast to the lack of success in validating subtypes of schizophrenia, there has been considerable progress in identifying other
conditions on the schizophrenia spectrum which share a similar genetic aetiology and symptom profile (Mamah & Barch, 2011). This
approach to classification of schizophrenia-like psychotic disorders is a central organizing principle in DSM-5 and is also implicit in ICD-10.
In DSM-5 schizophrenia spectrum disorders include those which have the same symptomatology as schizophrenia, but are of briefer
duration (brief psychotic disorder where the disturbance is less than a month and schizophreniform disorder where the disturbance
is between 1 and 6 months); those with the same symptomatology as schizophrenia in addition to manic or depressive symptoms

(schizoaffective disorder); those characterized by a single class of psychotic symptoms (delusional disorder and catatonia); and those
characterized by chronic mild schizophrenia-like symptoms (schizotypal personality disorder). An attenuated psychosis syndrome for
individuals with brief episodes of one or more psychotic symptoms and insight into these is included in DSM-5 as a schizophrenia spectrum
condition deserving further study. This condition is typically shown by those at high risk for developing psychosis (Fusar-Poli et al.,
2013). In ICD-10 schizophrenia spectrum disorders include schizophrenia, acute and transient psychotic disorders, schizoaffective disorder,
persistent and induced delusional disorders, and schizotypal disorder.
Research on the shared aetiology, symptomatology and treatment response of schizophrenia spectrum disorders and factor analytic
studies of their symptomatology suggests that the distribution of psychotic symptoms within the population more closely approximates
dimensions rather than disease-like categories. The three principal dimensions are those involving positive symptoms, negative symptoms
and disorganization, as described in Table 25.1 (Rietkerk et al., 2008).
Table 25.2 Diagnosis of schizophrenia
DSM-5
ICD-10
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant
portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully
treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
A minimum of one very clear symptom (or two or more, if
less clear cut) belonging to any one of the groups (a) to (d)
or at least two of the symptoms (e) to (h) should have been
present most of the time during a period of 1 month or more.

3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or
incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behaviour.
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or
avolition).
B. For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the
disturbance, level of functioning in one or more major areas,
such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, is markedly
below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in
childhood or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level
of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning).
C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months.
This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms
(or less if successfully treated) that meet Criterion A (i.e., active-
phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or
residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods,
the signs of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative
symptoms or by two or more symptoms listed in Criterion
A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual
perceptual experiences).
A. thought echo, thought insertion or withdrawal and
thought broadcasting
B. delusions of control, influence, or passivity, clearly
referred to body or limb movements or specific thoughts,
actions or sensations; delusional perception
C. hallucinatory voices giving a running commentary on
the patient's behaviour, or discussing the patient among
themselves, or other types of hallucinatory voice coming
from some part of the body
D. persistent delusions of other kinds that are culturally
inappropriate and completely impossible, such as
religious or political identity, or superhuman powers and
abilities
E. persistent hallucinations in any modality, when
accompanied either by fleeting or half-formed delusions
without clear affective content, or by persistent
overvalued ideas, or when occurring every day for weeks
or months on end

D. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features have been ruled out because either 1) no major
depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently with
the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred
during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a
minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of
the illness.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical
condition.
F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a
communication disorder of child hood onset, the additional
diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions
or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms
of schizophrenia, are also present for at least 1 month (or less if
successfully treated). (For specifiers, see DSM-5 pp. 99-100.)
F. breaks or interpolations in the train of thought, resulting
in incoherence or irrelevant speech or neologisms
G. catatonic behaviour, such as excitement, posturing, or
waxy flexibility, negativism, mutism and stupor
H. negative symptoms such as marked apathy, paucity
of speech, and blunting or incongruity of emotional
responses, usually resulting in social withdrawal and
lowering of social performance
I. a significant and consistent change in the overall quality
of some aspects of personal behaviour, manifest as loss
of interest, aimlessness, idleness, a self-absorbed attitude
and social withdrawal.
Note: DSM-5 diagnostic criteria are reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright
2013), American Psychiatric Association. The material in the column headed ICD-10 is a summary of the clinical description and diagnostic guidelines for
schizophrenia. For the full official WHO clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines for this disorder, see WHO (1992, pp. 86-95).

The dimensional distribution of psychotic symptoms within the normal population, and the considerable heterogeneity in patterns of
symptomatology, course and treatment response among groups of individuals with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or psychosis, has led a
significant group of researchers and service-users to question the validity of defining psychosis or schizophrenia as a syndrome, mental
illness, disease or disorder. In contrast, hearing voices (hallucinations), holding distinctive beliefs (delusions) and other psychotic symptoms
are viewed as discrete experiences, on a continuum with normal experience stemming in part from early trauma and not exclusively due to
genetic and neurobiological factors (or 'brain disease') (Cook, 2014; Read & Dillon, 2013). This perspective has championed the development
of psychological interventions for addressing psychotic experiences, and is aligned with the recovery movement within the mental health
field discussed in Chapter 1 (Roe & Davidson, 2008; Slade, 2009). In contrast, the tradition stemming from Kraepelin's (1899) seminal work
and represented in contemporary practice by the syndromal approach in DSM-5 and ICD-10 has played a central role in the development of
pharmacological interventions for psychosis to address underlying neurobiological aetiological factors.
Clinical Features
A range of clinical features associated with schizophrenia spectrum psychoses have been identified through research and clinical
observation (Cook, 2014; Lieberman & Murray, 2012; Mueser & Jeste, 2008; Weinberger & Harrison, 2011). A classification of these in the
domains of perception, cognition, emotion, behaviour, social adjustment and somatic state is given in Table 25.3.
Table 25.3 Clinical features of schizophrenia
Perception
• Breakdown in perceptual selectivity
• Hallucinations


Cognition
• Delusions
• Confused sense of self
• Lack of insight
• Formal thought disorder
• Cognitive impairment (IQ, attention, memory, executive function, psychomotor speed)
Emotion
• Prodromal anxiety and depression
• Inappropriate, flattened or blunted affect
• Post-psychotic depression
Behaviour
• Prodromal excitation (sleeplessness, impulsivity, overactivity, compulsivity)
• Impaired goal-directed behaviour
• Excited or retarded catatonic behaviour
Social adjustment
• Poor self-care and hygiene
• Poor educational or work performance
• Withdrawal from peer relationships
• Deterioration in family relationships


Somatic state
• Comorbid substance use
• Comorbid health problems (COPD, obesity, heart disease, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis B & C)
• Unhealthy lifestyle (poor diet, obesity, little exercise, smoking)

Perception
At a perceptual level individuals with schizophrenia spectrum psychoses describe a breakdown in perceptual selectivity, with difficulties
focusing on essential information or stimuli to the exclusion of accidental details or background noise. Everything seems to be salient and
it is difficult to distinguish figure from ground. During an acute psychotic state, internal stimuli such as verbal thoughts are experienced
as auditory hallucinations which have the same sensory quality as the spoken word. Auditory hallucinations may be experienced as loud
thoughts, as thoughts being repeated by another person aloud (thought echo), as voices speaking inside the head or as voices coming from
somewhere in the outer environment. Auditory hallucination may occur as a third-person commentary on the individual's action, as a voice
speaking in the second person directly to the individual, or as two or more people talking or arguing. Individuals may perceive voices to vary
along a number of dimensions. Voices may be construed as benign or malevolent, controlling or impotent, all-knowing or knowing little
about the person, and the person may feel compelled to do what the voice says or not. Hallucinations that are perceived to be malevolent,
controlling, all-knowing and which the individual feels compelled to obey are far more distressing than those which are not construed as
having these attributes. As well as varying in the distress they cause, hallucinations may vary in frequency and intensity; the situations or
stimuli that trigger their onset (for example threatening events); and the degree to which individuals can suppress them by using coping
strategies such as distraction, relaxation or seeking social support. While auditory hallucinations are the most common in schizophrenia
spectrum disorders, hallucinations may occur in other sensory modalities. Somatic hallucinations often occur in schizophrenia spectrum


psychoses, with individuals reporting feelings of electricity in their body or things crawling under their skin. These may be given delusional
interpretations. For example, a service-user reported that the television was activating a transmitter in her pelvis and she could feel the
electricity from this causing insects to grow and move around under her skin. Visual hallucinations - seeing visions – are relatively rare in
schizophrenia spectrum psychoses, but common in temporal lobe epilepsy.
Cognition
Delusions are the most prominent cognitive clinical features of schizophrenia spectrum psychoses. Delusions are false, idiosyncratic,
illogical and stubbornly maintained erroneous inferences drawn to explain unusual experiences, such as hallucinations. For example,
a service-user with auditory hallucinations in which she heard an authoritative voice giving her commands to gather the children to
her, inferred that she had been chosen by God to prepare all children for the second coming of Christ. Delusions may arise, not only
from hallucinations, but also from unusual feelings associated with psychosis. Persecutory delusions may develop from feelings of being
watched. Delusions of thought insertion or thought withdrawal may develop as explanations for feelings that thoughts are not one's own, or
that one's thoughts have suddenly disappeared. Factor analyses show that delusions fall into three broad categories: delusions of influence
(including thought withdrawal or insertion, and beliefs about being controlled); delusions of self-significance (including delusions of
grandeur or guilt); and delusions of persecution (Vahia & Cohen, 2008). Delusions may vary in the degree of conviction with which they are
held (from great certainty to little certainty), the degree to which the person is preoccupied with them (the amount of time spent thinking
about the belief), and the amount of distress they cause.
Particular sets of delusions may entail a confused sense of self, particularly paranoid delusions where individuals believe that they are
being persecuted or punished for misdeeds or delusions of control where there is a belief that one's actions are controlled by others.
During a psychotic episode there is usually lack of insight and impaired judgement. That is, individuals believe that the content of their
hallucinations and delusions are legitimate, and they have difficulty entertaining the idea that these experiences and beliefs arise from

a clinical condition or are not believed by others. Between psychotic episodes, insight may improve and service-users may move towards
accepting that their hallucination and delusions are psychotic symptoms.
The speech of clients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders is difficult to understand because of abnormalities in the underlying form of
thought. Formal thought disorder is characterized by tangentiality, derailment, incoherence, thought blocking, loss of goal and neologisms.
With tangentiality, answers given to questions are off the point. With derailment, sentences make sense, but little meaning is conveyed by
sequences of sentences because there is a constant jumping from one topic to another with only very loose associations between topics and
little logic to what is said. With incoherence, sentences are incorrectly formed so they do not make sense. With thought blocking, the person
abruptly stops in midsentence and is unable complete their train of thought. With loss of goal, there is a difficulty in following a logical train
of thought from A to B. With neologisms, new words are made up that have an idiosyncratic meaning for the patient.
Cognitive impairment or deterioration occurs in schizophrenia. This may be either general or specific. With general cognitive
deterioration, there is a reduction in overall IQ with many cognitive functions negatively affected. With specific cognitive impairment
one or more of the following functions may be impaired: attention, memory, cognitive flexibility, social cognition and executive function,
particularly the capacity to follow through on a planned course of action. Cognitive impairment is a better predictor of disability and
vocational functioning than positive symptoms.
Emotions
At an emotional level, during the prodromal phase, before an acute psychotic episode, anxiety or depression may occur in response to initial
changes in perceptual selectivity and cognitive inefficiency. A key part of relapse prevention is for service-users to learn how to identify
and manage prodromal changes in affect. During acute psychotic episodes, anxiety or depression may occur in response to hallucinations,
delusions, formal thought disorder and other distressing symptoms. A disturbance of affect is the hallmark of hebephrenic schizophrenia.
With inappropriate affect the individual responds not to the external social context but to internal stimuli such as auditory hallucinations,

for example by laughing wildly. Diminished expression of emotions, also referred to as flattened or blunted affect may occur, particularly
in chronic cases. During remission following an episode of psychosis, the sense of loss that comes with increased insight into the problems
entailed by psychosis may give rise to post-psychotic depression.

Behaviour

At a behavioural level, prodromal excitation may occur prior to an acute psychotic episode. This may be characterized by sleep disturbance,
impulsive behaviour, and overactivity which may include compulsive behaviour. During acute psychotic episodes, avolition occurs with
impairment of goal-directed behaviour. In chronic cases catatonic behaviour may occur with impairment in the capacity to initiate and
organize voluntary movement and posture. Catatonia may be either retarded or excited. Excessive purposeless motor activity is the hallmark
of excited catatonia and may include stereotypies (repetitive actions), echolalia (repeating words said by others) or echopraxia (imitating the
actions of others). With retarded catatonic behaviour there is a marked reduction in purposeful activity. Individuals may show immobility,
mutism, adopt unusual postures for long periods of time and display waxy flexibility (allowing one’s limbs to be manipulated like a warm
candle) or negativism (resisting attempts to have one’s limbs moved).

Social adjustment

In schizophrenia spectrum disorders there is a marked functional impairment and deterioration in social adjustment. The capacity for self-
care, dressing appropriately, grooming and personal hygiene deteriorates, so that people with psychosis often look dishevelled and unkempt.
A significant decline in performance in educational and work settings occurs. There is a withdrawal from regular socializing with friends
and difficulty making and maintaining new relationships. A deterioration in relationships with family members also occurs. Psychosis has
a negative impact on parent-child and sibling relationships.


Somatic state

About half of all people with schizophrenia have comorbid substance use disorders and almost three-quarters have significant health
problems. The most common health problems include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which is usually due to smoking;
heart disease and diabetes due to obesity; and HIV/AIDS and hepatitis B and C due to unsafe sex and intravenous drug use. The substance use
and medical problems so common in schizophrenia are essentially lifestyle problems. On the positive side, schizophrenia is associated with
reduced rates of cancer and rheumatoid arthritis (Tandon et al., 2008a).

Epidemiology course, outcome and risk factors

The lifetime prevalence rates of schizophrenia spectrum disorders are 0.2% for delusional disorder, 0.2-1.1% for schizoaffective disorder,
0.7% for schizophrenia and 4% for schizotypal disorder (Abrams et al., 2008; American Psychiatric Association, 2013; Saha et al., 2005).
Less is known about the epidemiology of other schizophrenia spectrum disorders, and most is known about schizophrenia. The focus in
this section will therefore be on schizophrenia. Slightly more men than women suffer from schizophrenia. The male to female ratio is about
1.4:1 (McGrath et al., 2004). About a third of cases have their first psychotic episodes during adolescence. The onset of schizophrenia is
earlier in males than females (Murray & Van Os, 1998). The rates of schizophrenia are similar across countries and cultures when similar
diagnostic criteria are used (Mueser & Duva, 2011). Comorbid alcohol and substance use is common in schizophrenia (Cementon et al.,
2012). Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in response to the experience of psychotic symptoms and hospitalization are
common among trauma survivors with psychosis (Berry et al., 2013). Psychosis occurs in up to 6% of people with seizure disorders (Clancy
etal., 2014).


Schizophrenia follows a distinctive course, although there is considerable variability across cases (Jablensky, 2009; Jobe & Harrow, 2010;
Lang et al., 2013; Mueser & Duva, 2011, Tandon et al., 2009; van Os et al., 2012). The onset of schizophrenia typically occurs in late
adolescence or early adulthood and may be acute or insidious. Typically the onset takes place over 5 years, starting with negative and
depressive symptoms, followed by cognitive and social impairment and finally positive symptoms. Longitudinal studies suggest that
there is an early deterioration phase that extends over 5-10 years, a stabilization phase and a final gradual improvement phase. For
50-70% of cases the condition follows a chronic relapsing course, typically with incomplete remission between episodes. However, up
to 40% of service-users show one or more periods of complete recovery with good adjustment for at least a year and 4-20% show
complete remission. Psychotic episodes may last 1-6 months, although some extend to a year. They are usually preceded by a prodromal
period of a number of weeks. Psychotic episodes may be shortened and the severity of symptomatology ameliorated through early
detection and the use of pharmacological and psychological treatment as outlined later. Inter-episode functioning may vary greatly and
better inter-episode functioning is associated with a better prognosis. The duration of remission between episodes may be lengthened
through the use of maintenance medication and psychosocial interventions to reduce stress and improve coping and illness management.
With treatment, usually positive symptoms (hallucinations and delusions) abate between episodes but negative symptoms (diminished
emotional expression, alogia and avolition) are relatively enduring and are more likely to persist during remission. In the stabilization phase
of schizophrenia positive symptoms become less prominent, while negative symptoms and cognitive deficits become more prominent. The
lifespan of people with schizophrenia is about 9 years shorter than that of the general population, and this is partly accounted for by the high
rate of suicide during the first 10 years of the disorder and the high rate of comorbid medical disorders mentioned earlier.

About half of all people with schizophrenia attempt suicide or self-harm; the lifetime risk for completed suicide is 5%; and suicide usually
occurs in the early phase of the disorder (Challis et al., 2013; Heisel, 2008; Hor & Taylor, 2010; Schennach-Wolff et al., 2011). Risk factors for
suicide include being a young, highly educated male with positive symptoms, comorbid depressed mood and substance use, a family history
of suicide and previous suicide attempts. Treatment adherence is a protective factor for suicide in psychosis.


Risk factors for schizophrenia are listed in Table 25.4 (Lenzenweger, 2010; Matheson et al., 2011, 2013; Murray & Castle, 2009; Tandon
et _al., 2008b). The greatest risk factor for schizophrenia is a family history of psychosis. This probably finds subclinical expression as
schizotypy, a personality trait in which the central feature is a disorganized thinking style similar to (although much milder than) that
shown in schizophrenia (Lenzenweger, 2010). Other risk factors make a small but significant contribution to overall risk within the
context of that associated with genetic vulnerability. However, at present there is no consensus on how these risk factors operate. Prenatal
and perinatal risk factors, such as maternal flu infection and obstetric complications, probably have a negative direct or indirect effect
on the development of the nervous system in line with the neurodevelopmental hypothesis mentioned later, rendering those genetically
predisposed even more neurobiologically vulnerable to psychosis (Murray & Lewis, 1987). Trauma exposure, childhood adversity and
most demographic risk factors (being an unmarried, urban migrant of low socio-economic status) are associated with higher levels of
stress and lower levels of social support, which increase the risk of psychosis in the genetically vulnerable according to diathesis-stress
conceptualizations of the condition (Zubin & Spring, 1977). It is probable that the mechanism by which cannabis use affects schizophrenia
is neurobiological rather than social-environmental (Barkus & Murray, 2010).

Table 25.4 Risk factors for schizophrenia
Genetic factors as aye -
+ Positive family history of psychosis
Personality « Schizotypy
Prenatal and perinatal factors . . Pen :
+ Maternal flu infection or malnutrition in 1st or 2nd trimester


+ Father over 35 years
+ Obstetric complications (low birth weight, prematurity, resuscitation)
+ Birth in late winter or early spring
Demographic factors
«Male
+ Unmarried
+ Urban dwelling
+ Migrant
+ Low socio-economic status
Life history factors :
+ Trauma history
+ Cannabis use
In the short term, relapse is more likely in cases where there is heavy cannabis use, poor treatment adherence, frequent contact with family
members who display high expressed emotion (criticism, hostility and emotional overinvolvement) and exposure to acute stressful life
events (Jablensky, 2009).
Longitudinal studies show that the risk factors listed in Table 25.5 are associated with poorer outcome (Alvarez-Jiménez et al., 2012; Bota
etal. 2011; Jablensky, 2009; Jobe & Harrow, 2010; van Os et al., 2012). A poor outcome is associated with a family history of schizophrenia,
particularly with negative symptoms, and a better outcome is associated with a family history of depression. A poor outcome occurs in more


males than females. It is associated with substance use, treatment non-adherence and a longer period of untreated psychosis in people who
have poor premorbid adjustment, an early insidious onset with no clear stressful life event preceding their first treated episode. A high level
of trait anxiety, which is probably subserved by hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis overactivity and an external locus of control are
the main personality traits associated with poor outcome. People with this stress-sensitive profile are more reactive to stressful life events,
including those associated with living in a developing country, and family-based stress associated with high levels of expressed emotion,
all of which are also risk factors for poor outcome. A poorer outcome occurs for those who are single and have few friends, factors which
suggest low levels of social support. The symptom profile predictive of a poor outcome is marked by severe negative symptoms, cognitive
impairment and lack of depressive symptoms.
Table 25.5 Risk factors for a poor outcome in schizophrenia
Family history + Family history of schizophrenia (not depression)
Early stage .Male
+ Obstetric complications
+ Early age of onset
+ Insidious onset
+ Poor premorbid adjustment
+ Longer duration of untreated psychosis
+ Lack of an identifiable precipitating stressor prior to hospitalization


Personality traits . : . a
+ Trait anxiety (and HPA axis hyperactivity)
+ External locus of control
Symptom profile
ymP P + Severe negative symptoms (blunted affect, alogia, avolition)
+ Severe cognitive impairment
+ Lack of depressive symptoms
Lifestyle
sty + Poor treatment adherence
+ Substance use
Social context .
+ Single
+ Few friends
+ Stressful life events
+ Frequent contact with family members who display high expressed emotion (overinvolvement and criticism)
+ Living in a developing country
A favourable outcome in schizophrenia is associated with a range of factors (Bota et al., 2011). These include good premorbid adjustment,
and a brief duration of untreated psychosis characterized by an acute onset in response to precipitating stressful life events. A family history


of affective disorder (rather than schizophrenia) or little psychopathology and a personal symptom profile in which there are affective as well
as psychotic features are also predictive of a good prognosis. A better outcome occurs for those who have a favourable life situation to return
to following discharge from hospital. Approximately half of individuals with attenuated psychotic syndrome at high risk for psychosis do
not develop a schizophrenia spectrum disorder (Simon et al., 2013).

Aetiological theories

Historically research on schizophrenia (and schizophrenia spectrum conditions) has followed from two principal traditions founded by the
German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin (1899) and the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler (1911). Kraepelin defined a condition, which he named
dementia praecox, as principally characterized by a constellation of observable symptoms (such as delusions, hallucinations and thought
disorder) and a chronic course due to an underlying degenerative neurobiological condition. In contrast, Bleuler, who coined the term
schizophrenia, conceptualized the condition as a disturbance in a circumscribed set of inferred psychological processes. He speculated that
the capacity to associate one thought with another; to associate thoughts with emotions; and the self with reality were impaired or split -
hence the term schizophrenia (from the Greek words for split and mind). Bleuler proposed that the four primary symptoms of schizophrenia
were loosening of Associations (difficulty thinking coherently); incongruous or flattened Affect; impaired goal-directed behaviour or
Ambivalence due to conflicting impulses; and Autism or social withdrawal. The capitalized and highlighted words in the last sentence are
sometimes referred to a Bleuler’s Four As. Bleuler argued that positive symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations were secondary
to these central psychological difficulties. For Bleuler, symptoms of schizophrenia such as delusions and hallucinations represented the
person’s attempt to cope with the world despite disruption of central psychological processes. While Kraepelin conceptualized schizophrenia
as being distributed within the population as a discrete disease-like category, Bleuler viewed the disturbed psychological processes that he
proposed underpinned schizophrenia as on a continuum with normal psychological functioning. These different views were precursors of


the modern categorical and dimensional approaches to understanding schizophrenia (Linscott & Van Os, 2010). Current evidence supports
a dimensional model within which schizotypy in the healthy population and schizophrenia spectrum disorders fall on a continuum (Nelson
etal., 2013).

Up until the late 1970s, Bleuler’s tradition, associated with a broad definition of schizophrenia, predominated in the US whereas in the
UK, Ireland and Europe, Kraepelin’s narrower definition held sway. Following the landmark US-UK diagnostic study (US-UK Team, 1974)
that highlighted the extraordinary differences between the way schizophrenia was defined in America and Britain, there has been a gradual
move towards developing an internationally acceptable set of diagnostic criteria. The narrowing of the gap between the North American
and European definitions of schizophrenia is reflected in the marked similarity between the diagnostic criteria for the disorder contained in
current versions of the ICD and DSM presented in Table 25.2

Modern research on schizophrenia has also been guided by two broad groups of theories. The first, in the tradition of Kraepelin, has been
concerned largely with the role of biological factors in the aetiology and maintenance of the disorder. The second group of theories, in the
tradition of Bleuler, has addressed the role of psychological factors in schizophrenia. In the following sections, biological and psychological
theories of schizophrenia and related research findings will be considered. Key tenets and implications of these theories are given in Table
25.6.

Biological theories

Biological theories of schizophrenia spectrum disorders point to the role of genetic and neurodevelopmental factors in rendering people
vulnerable to the development of psychosis, and to the role of structural and functional brain abnormalities and dysregulation of
neurotransmitter systems in the aetiology of psychosis.


Genetic hypothesis

The genetic hypothesis proposes that schizophrenia spectrum disorders arise primarily from an inherited vulnerability to psychosis.
Results of twin, adoption and family studies show that a predisposition to schizophrenia spectrum disorders is genetically transmitted.
Schizophrenia is about 80% heritable (Glatt, 2008; Rujescu & Karayiorgou, 2012; Sullivan et al., 2003). The lifetime risk for developing
schizophrenia is proportional to the amount of shared genes. For monozygotic twins the risk is 48%; for dizygotic twins the risk is 17%; for
children of an affected parent the risk is 13%; for grandchildren the risk is 5%; and for members of the general population the risk is about
1% (Ritsner & Gottesman, 2011). It is also probable that the vulnerability is polygenetically transmitted since the results of family studies
cannot easily be accounted for by simpler models of genetic transmission.

Many candidate genes for schizophrenia have been investigated; some have been identified; and where significant associations between
candidate genes and schizophrenia have been found, a growing number of consistent replication studies are available (Harrison, 2009;
Ritsner & Gottesman, 2011). Candidate genes for which consistent evidence is available affect the growth and organization of neurons in
the brain, the development of synapses, and glutamate and dopamine neurotransmission. Candidate genes include neuregulin 1 (NRG1)
and disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 (DISC1) which have multiple roles in brain development, synapse formation and synaptic signalling;
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) which regulates dopamine signalling in the frontal cortex; D-amino acid oxidase activator (DAOA)
and dysbindin (DTNBP1) which affect glutamate signalling; regulator of G-protein signalling 4 (RGS4) and calcineurin (PP3CC) which
affect dopamine and glutamate neurotransmission. The mechanisms by which candidate genes give rise to the symptoms of schizophrenia
through altering the structure and functioning of the nervous system are currently a focus for intensive research internationally (Maric &
Svrakic, 2012). Despite evidence for the role of genetic factors in schizophrenia, many people who develop schizophrenia have no relatives
who suffer from the condition, and some people who have a genetic predisposition to schizophrenia do not develop psychotic symptoms. It
is therefore likely that environmental factors must also contribute to the development of schizophrenia spectrum disorders.


Table 25.6 Biological and psychological theories of schizophrenia
Type Theory Theoretical principles Principles of treatment
Biological Genetic hypothesis A genetic predisposition renders Psychoeducation and
some young people vulnerable to medication
schizophrenia
Neurodevelopmental hypothesis Prenatal and perinatal adversities Multimodal interventions
which cause neuroanatomical
abnormalities lead to schizophrenia
in genetically vulnerable cases
Neurotransmitter dysregulation Dysregulation of the Antipsychotic medication
hypotheses dopaminergic and glutamatergic
neurotransmission systems causes
the symptoms of schizophrenia
Two syndrome hypothesis Type 1 schizophrenia is genetically | Antipsychotic medication to
determined and leads to positive treat positive symptoms and
symptoms associated with rehabilitative interventions to
dysregulation of the dopamine treat negative symptoms
system.Type 2 schizophrenia is
ceveeeeeeteeseteeeeteseetneeeteseetneretneseetneretneeeetnerstiecettnersteceetnerseeee V8 t0 prenatal OF perinatay Org sceeeeeretee


damage and leads to negative
symptoms

Neurotoxicity hypothesis Extended period of untreated Early intervention
psychosis causes neurobiological
pathology

Psychological theories Diathesis-stress model Psychosis occurs when Multimodal interventions

neurobiologically vulnerable
individuals are exposed to
psychosocial stress

Family theory and therapy Expressed emotion (criticism and Psychoeducational family
overinvolvement) affect the course _ therapy to reduce emotional
of psychosis, particularly the intensity of family
timing and rate of relapse interactions

Cognitive theory and cognitive When neurobiologically vulnerable Cognitive behaviour therapy

behaviour therapy individuals are exposed to stress, to challenge dysfunctional
this increases physiological thinking and promote use of
arousal, reduces available cognitive adaptive coping strategies
resources, and increases experience
of delusions, hallucinations and
negative symptoms which involve
cognitive biases, distortions,
misattributions and dysfunctional
coping strategies


Cognitive deficit theory and Functional impairment in Cognitive remediation to

cognitive remediation psychosis is due to in large part ameliorate cognitive deficits
to cognitive deficits affecting and improve functional
attention, memory, processing impairment
speed, cognitive flexibility, social
cognition and executive function

Social skill and social cognition Functional impairment in Social skills and social

theory psychosis is due to in large part to cognition training to
deficits in social skills and social ameliorate social skills
cognition and cognition deficits

and improve functional
impairment

Prodromal hypothesis The onset of an episode of Early intervention and
psychosis is heralded by a clearly developing relapse prevention
identifiable prodromal dysphoric plans to manage prodromal
syndrome symptoms

Recovery model The recovery process isa personal = Multiple recovery-focused
journey from psychosis to interventions and service
mental health. The recovery delivery models including
model privileges the concepts of early intervention; strengths-
optimism, well-being, personal based case management;
strengths, supportive relationships, assertive community
collaboration, personal choice, treatment; and vocational
adaptive coping, developing rehabilitation


a meaningful life, civil rights,

empowerment and inclusion
Neurodevelopmental hypothesis
The neurodevelopmental hypothesis proposes that prenatal and perinatal factors (often referred to as obstetric complications) interact with
a genetic vulnerability to psychosis to give rise to atypical neuroanatomical development, initially in infancy and later in adolescence,
and this culminates in the emergence of psychosis (Fatemi & Folsom, 2009; McGlashan & Hoffman, 2000; Murray & Lewis, 1987). In
normal development synaptic connections within the brain increase up to 2 years, decline gradually before puberty and then decrease
markedly in adolescence. This sharp decline is due to synaptic pruning which involves the elimination of superfluous synapses. It coincides
with the emergence of sophisticated cognitive skills in early adolescence such as the capacity for abstract reasoning. According to the
neurodevelopmental hypothesis, in schizophrenia the synaptic pruning process is excessive, leading to a fragmented brain and consequent
psychotic symptoms (McGlashan & Hoffman, 2000). Excessive pruning is expected to have a more profound effect where fewer synapses
were formed during early brain development due to an adverse intrauterine environment associated with obstetric complications.
Obstetric complications
A growing body of evidence supports the link between obstetric complications and schizophrenia (Ellman & Cannon, 2008; Matheson
et al., 2011). Obstetric complications that have been investigated with reference to the neurodevelopmental hypothesis include maternal
infection with influenza or rubella during early pregnancy, maternal malnutrition during early pregnancy, diabetes mellitus, smoking
during pregnancy, bleeding during pregnancy, problematic labour or delivery, anoxia or asphyxia at birth, low birth weight, small head
circumference and congenital malformations. About 20-30% of clients with schizophrenia have a history of obstetric complications
compared with 5-10% of the unaffected population. Lack of oxygen to the foetus - foetal hypoxia - is involved in many oSbstetric


complications associated with psychosis. Cases with a history of obstetric complications show an earlier onset of schizophrenia and more
pronounced neuroanatomical abnormalities as predicted by the neurodevelopmental hypothesis.

Neuroanatomy

In support of the neurodevelopmental hypothesis, five neuroanatomical abnormalities have consistently emerged in neuroimaging and
post-mortem studies of schizophrenia (Bora et al., 2011; Girgis & Abi-Dargham, 2012; Keshavan et al., 2008; Stewart & Davis, 2008). The
first abnormality is reduced overall brain volume and enlargement of the cerebral ventricles (particularly the left ventricle) associated with
brain atrophy. The second abnormality concerns the reduced size of and activation within the frontal lobes. The dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex is particularly affected, where there is also increased neuronal packing density. This abnormality may underpin cognitive deficits (IQ,
executive function, attention and memory). The third abnormality is reduced temporal lobe volume including reductions in the size of the
amygdala and hippocampus, structures which subserve emotional processing and memory. The fourth abnormality is decreased thalamic
volume and disorganization of the thalamocortical pathways. The thalamus plays a central role in attention, and in filtering and relaying
information to various areas of the brain including the prefrontal cortex. The fifth abnormality is disorganization of white matter tracts and
reduced connectivity between many areas of the brain. A detailed understanding of how these neuroanatomical abnormalities give rise to
the symptoms of schizophrenia is a focus of ongoing research. Many of the structural brain abnormalities listed here precede the onset of
psychosis and in some cases progress over the course of schizophrenia (Chan et al., 2011).

Psychophysiology

Results of studies which show that schizophrenia is associated with abnormalities in a number of psychophysiological indices reflective
of abnormal neurobiological processes also support the neurodevelopmental hypothesis (Javitt et al., 2008; Keshavan et al., 2008). Sleep
architecture assessed by electroencephalogram (EEG) is abnormal in schizophrenia. Total sleep time and time during rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep is reduced, as is REM sleep latency. Evoked potentials, which are detected with scalp electrodes during visual or auditory


tasks, are abnormal in schizophrenia, indicating impairments in neurobiological processes subserving visual and auditory perception
and information processing. Eye movements, especially those involved in smooth pursuit tracking of a moving target, are abnormal
in schizophrenia, indicating impairments in neurobiological processes subserving oculomotor control. These evoked potential and eye
movement abnormalities are highly heritable and present prior to the onset of acute psychosis.

Neurotransmitter dysregulation hypotheses

Neurotransmitter dysregulation hypotheses attribute psychotic symptoms to neurotransmission problems. Dysregulations of the
dopaminergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission systems have been found in schizophrenia (Downar & Kapur, 2008; Girgis & Abi-
Dargham, 2012). Genes which affect both of these neurotransmission systems have been implicated in the aetiology of the condition, as was
noted in the section on genetics.

Dopamine

The dopamine hypothesis arose from observations that medications such as chlorpromazine, which block dopamine D, receptors, alleviate
psychotic symptoms, and amphetamines which release dopamine induce paranoid psychosis (Seeman, 2011). The original dopamine
hypothesis, which attributed psychotic symptoms to an excess of dopamine, has inspired extensive research and the development of a
range of antipsychotic medications for schizophrenia; over time it has been supplanted by more sophisticated formulations. Available
evidence indicates that overactivity of the mesolymbic dopamine pathway subserves positive symptoms (hallucinations and delusions)
and underactivity of the mesocortical dopamine pathway subserves negative symptoms (blunted affect, alogia and avolition) and cognitive
impairment (Downar & Kapur, 2008). Antipsychotic medication improves symptoms in a half to two-thirds of cases of psychosis (Dolder,
2008; Miyamoto et al., 2012). First-generation antipsychotic medications such as chlorpromazine, which block dopamine D, receptors,
alleviate positive symptoms in most cases, but have no effect on negative symptoms. In contrast, newer second-generation antipsychotic


medications, such as clozapine, block dopamine D, receptors in the mesolymbic but not the mesocortical pathway, and so alleviate positive
symptoms and some negative symptoms.

Downar and Kapur (2008) have proposed the following explanation to link dysregulation of the dopamine system to psychotic symptoms.
Dopamine is the neurotransmitter that gives neural networks associated with thoughts or perceptions salience. Overactivity of the
mesolymbic dopamine pathway probably results in many thoughts and perceptions being misinterpreted as highly salient or important.
Thus, thoughts are misinterpreted as ‘voices’, and fleeting ideas that might otherwise be ignored are misinterpreted as being very important
and so are developed into delusional belief systems. Antipsychotic medications that block dopamine D, receptors reduce this tendency
to misinterpret unimportant perceptions and thoughts as highly salient. However, delusions that have already formed may need to be
re-evaluated, which is what occurs in cognitive therapy. In contrast to the overactive mesolymbic dopamine pathway, the underactive
mesocortical dopamine pathway reduces the salience with which certain perceptions, thoughts, feelings and motives are experienced. This
accounts for the negative symptoms (blunted affect, alogia and avolition) and cognitive impairment which occurs in schizophrenia.
Glutamate
The glutamate hypothesis proposes that underactivity of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors underpins the psychotic
symptoms and cognitive impairment shown in schizophrenia (Downar & Kapur, 2008; Harrison, 2009; Lin et al., 2012; Marsman et al.,
2013). Low glutamate levels have been found in the cerebrospinal fluid of people with schizophrenia. Drugs that reduce the efficiency of
NMDA glutamate receptors, such as phencyclidine (PCP or ‘angel dust’), induce psychotic symptoms. Drugs that increase the efficiency
of NMDA glutamate receptors, such as glycine, alleviate psychotic symptoms, particularly negative symptoms. Glutamate is the major
excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system and NMDA receptors play a central role in attention, perception and cognition.
Reduced glutamate activity in the prefrontal cortex may account for negative symptoms and cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. The
NMDA glutamate receptor also plays an important role in the development of the nervous system, for example by influencing synaptic


pruning, mentioned earlier in the section on neurodevelopment. Thus, dysfunction of NMDA glutamate receptors may account for some of
the neuroanatomical abnormalities associated with schizophrenia.

The dopamine or glutamate theories are not sophisticated enough to account for the all of the symptoms of schizophrenia spectrum
disorders and their response to antipsychotic medication. Contrary to predictions derived from the dopamine and glutamate hypotheses,
antipsychotic medication does not immediately reduce symptoms, although it immediately affects neurotransmission. About a third of
service-users do not respond to antipsychotic medication. No antipsychotic medication eliminates all symptoms. Medication only helps
to make some symptoms less frequent, intense or distressing. Dopamine-2 antagonists primarily affect positive symptoms and have little
impact on negative symptoms. Drugs that increase the efficiency of NMDA glutamate receptors primarily affect negative symptoms. Current
neurotransmitter-based hypotheses will ultimately be replaced by more complex and integrated formulations involving a number of
neurotransmission systems, which explain the anomalies listed earlier. Emerging findings on dysregulation of the GABAergic, serotonergic
and nicotinic-cholinergic systems in schizophrenia will probably be incorporated into these more sophisticated theories (Girgis & Abi-
Dargham, 2012).

Two syndrome hypothesis

In an attempt to integrate results from diverse clinical, genetic and neurobiological studies, Crow (1985) proposed the two syndrome
hypothesis. He argued that a distinction may be made between type 1 schizophrenia, which is a genetically inherited disease marked
by a dysregulation of the mesolymbic dopamine system and characterized by positive symptoms; and type 2 schizophrenia, which is
a neurodevelopmental disorder arising from prenatal or perinatal insults, resulting in neuroanatomical abnormalities and marked by
chronic negative symptoms. Type 1 schizophrenia, he proposed, has an acute onset, clear precipitants, predominantly positive symptoms,
a good response to antipsychotic medication and good inter-episode adjustment. Poor premorbid functioning, an insidious onset, a chronic
course, neuropsychological deficits, predominantly negative symptoms and a poor response to medication, he argued, characterize type 2


schizophrenia. The two syndrome hypothesis fits a good proportion of available data but is probably an oversimplification, since many cases
show aspects of both syndromes.

Neurotoxicity hypothesis

The neurotoxicity hypothesis proposes that an extended period of untreated psychosis causes neurobiological pathology. This hypothesis
was inspired by the observation of better outcomes in cases with a short duration of psychosis. Systematic reviews show that evidence to
support this hypothesis is mixed (e.g. Rund, 2014). However, it is possible that there is a threshold minimum duration that must be reached
for psychosis to have a neurotoxic effect, and in studies where this threshold was not reached, negative results occurred.

Psychological theories

Psychological theories, while not denying the role of biological factors, emphasize the critical role of psychological processes in the
development and maintenance of psychotic symptoms. They also provide a rationale for psychological interventions.

Diathesis-stress or stress-vulnerability theory

Stress-vulnerability or diathesis-stress theories propose that psychosis occurs when neurobiologically vulnerable individuals are exposed to
psychosocial stress (Rudnick & Lundberg, 2012; Walker et al., 2008; Zubin & Spring, 1977). Neurobiological vulnerability may be due to
genetic and/or prenatal and perinatal factors that impact on the integrity of the central nervous system. A substantial body of research
shows that the onset, course and severity of schizophrenia are associated with psychosocial stress and trauma (Ackner et al., 2013; Beards et
al., 2013; Bebbington & Kuipers, 2008; Gayer-Anderson & Morgan, 2013; Koutra et al., 2014; Matheson et al., 2013; Phillips et al., 2007; Read,
2010; Shevlin et al., 2008; Tandon et al., 2008b; Van Dam et al., 2012; Varese et al., 2012; Vassos et al., 2012; Walker et al., 2008). Physical and
sexual child abuse, neglect, family violence and serious injury renders people vulnerable to the development of psychosis, and there is a dose-


response relationship with greater levels of trauma being predictive of more severe symptoms. Low socio-economic status, migration to a
new country and living in an urban rather than a rural setting all confer risk for the development of schizophrenia, and all entail increased
stressful demands on coping resources. The onset of schizophrenia is typically triggered by a build-up of stressful life events (illness, injury,
bullying, life-transitions, loss, etc.). Following the onset of schizophrenia, a number of stresses associated with the experience of psychosis
and the response of others to it may compromise recovery. For most clients psychotic symptoms are intrinsically stressful, both as they are
occurring and later during remission, when insight develops and clients realize that their psychotic symptoms were due to a major and often
lifelong psychological disorder. Insight may lead to post-psychotic depression or PTSD symptoms. Highly emotional family responses to
psychosis, involving criticism and hostility on the one hand or excessive sympathy and emotional overinvolvement on the other (referred to
as expressed emotion), are very stressful and have been shown in numerous studies to significantly reduce the time to relapse in clients
stabilized on antipsychotic medication (Hooley, 2007). Social stresses resulting from psychosis including the loss of friendships, the
development of a constricted lifestyle, the experience of stigma and consequent social isolation may all compromise recovery. Occupational
impairment due to psychosis may lead to a reduction in financial resources and socio-economic status (often referred to as social drift), and
recovery may be impeded by these factors. Higher levels of stress are associated with more severe psychotic symptoms.

HPA axis overactivity is a central aspect of the stress response. In schizophrenia dysregulation of the HPA axis has been found, for
example, in studies of cortisol levels (Borges et al., 2013; Bradley & Dinan, 2010; Walker et al., 2008). Raised cortisol levels indicative of HPA
axis hyperactivity is more common in first episode psychosis. Heightened physiological arousal associated with HPA overactivity probably
exacerbates psychotic symptoms, particularly positive symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions and thought disorder. Elevated cortisol
levels arising from HPA axis overactivity compromises the efficiency of the immune system and increases vulnerability to cardiovascular
and metabolic disease, common in schizophrenia. Such illnesses in turn are additional stresses that may maintain or exacerbate psychosis.

People with a genetic vulnerability to schizophrenia, when exposed to challenging stressful events, probably develop psychotic symptoms
because they have difficulty using adaptive coping strategies. In a meta-analysis, O'Driscoll et al. (2014) found that people with


schizophrenia tended not to use adaptive strategies such as emotion management and cognitive reappraisal. In contrast they report frequent
use of maladaptive avoidant coping and dissociation

Multimodal interventions based on the stress-vulnerability model, involving antipsychotic medication and psychological therapies, aim
to equip people with psychosis and their families with the resources to control psychotic symptoms, reduce environmental stress, enhance
social support and work towards recovery. In a large meta-analysis of 106 studies of interventions for schizophrenia, Mojtabai et al. (1998)
found that after an average of 17 months, the relapse rate for clients with schizophrenia who received psychological therapy plus medication
was 20% lower than that of those who received medication only. The relapse rate in clients treated with medication only was 52% and that
for clients treated with medication combined with psychological therapy was 32%. Family therapy, cognitive behaviour therapy, cognitive
remediation therapy, social skills training and vocational rehabilitation are among the range of evidence-based psychological interventions
that have been developed to help people with psychosis and their families achieve these aims (Kern et al., 2009; Lieberman & Murray, 2012;
Mueser & Jeste, 2008; Rubin et al., 2010; Tandon et al., 2010). A diathesis-stress model is presented in Figure 25.1
Family theory and therapy
Family theory proposes that the family environment affects the course of psychosis and that interventions which optimize the family
environment support recovery. About half of medicated clients with schizophrenia relapse, and relapse rates are higher in unsupportive or
stressful family environments, characterized by high levels of expressed emotion which involves criticism, hostility or emotional
overinvolvement (Barrowclough & Lobban, 2008; Koutra et al., 2014). High levels of expressed emotion arise from family members’
appraisals of the controllability of psychotic symptoms. Family members who express high levels of criticism or hostility tend to view clients
as having a high degree of control over their psychotic symptoms and therefore hold clients responsible for their difficulties. In contrast,
those who express high levels of emotional overinvolvement tend to attribute patient's symptoms to uncontrollable factors and so view
clients as helpless victims of a psychiatric illness. Low expressed emotion occurs where family members have an accurate understanding of


psychosis and skills for managing the condition within a family context. The aim of psychoeducational family therapy is to reduce family
stress and enhance family support so as to delay or prevent relapse and rehospitalization, and also to promote recovery. This is achieved by
helping family members understand psychosis within a stress-vulnerability framework and develop knowledge and skills to manage the
condition. Psychoeducational family therapy may take a number of formats including therapy sessions with single families; therapy
sessions with multiple families; group therapy sessions for relatives; or parallel group therapy sessions for relative and patient groups.
Family therapy may be conducted in clinical settings or in clients’ homes. Family therapy involves psychoeducation based on the stress-
vulnerability models of psychosis with a view to helping families understand and manage psychotic symptoms, antipsychotic medication,
related stresses and early warning signs of relapse. Psychoeducational family therapy also helps families develop communication and
problem-solving skills, reduce destructive expressions of anger and guilt, and promote self-care among non-symptomatic family members
(Falloon et al., 1993; Kuipers et al., 2002; McFarlane, 2004). Meta-analyses have shown that compared with medication alone, multimodal
programmes including psychoeducational family therapy and medication lead to lower relapse and rehospitalization rates, improved
medication adherence and improved adjustment and knowledge about psychosis of other family members (Lucksted et al., 2012;
Pfammatter et al., 2006; Sin & Norman, 2013). Effective family therapy spans about 9 months, and longer, more intense programmes are
more effective.


a
c=! J


Figure 25.1 A diathesis-stress model of schizophrenia

Cognitive theory and cognitive behaviour therapy

Beck has proposed an integrative model to explain the development of symptoms in schizophrenia and then developed a cognitive
behavioural approach to address these symptoms based on this model (Beck et al., 2009). According to the model, when people with
a neurobiological vulnerability to schizophrenia are exposed to stress, this increases their physiological arousal (HPA axis hyperactivity).
There is a consequent reduction in their available cognitive resources. This increases their experience of psychotic symptoms. In early life,
exposure to stressful events and trauma contribute to the development of schemas containing dysfunctional attitudes and beliefs, as well as
cognitive biases to make inaccurate inferences. These are activated by exposure to stress in later life and inform the content of hallucinations
and delusions. Exposure to stress and related hyperarousal in adulthood sets the scene for the development of positive symptoms, negative
symptoms and disorganization. This is because at these times negative schemas and related cognitive biases are reactivated. Also, limited
cognitive resources are available to check out the validity of inferences made about the environment and to manage day-to-day problem
solving

Within CBT, service-users are helped to view all of their symptoms as on a continuum with normal experience, as arising within the
context of a stress-vulnerability model, and as being controllable through the use of cognitive behavioural strategies and medication. A
fundamental premise of CBT is that activating events give rise to negative automatic thoughts (informed by beliefs in negative schemas),
which in turn affect mood, behaviour and the strength of beliefs within negative schemas.

From a CBT perspective, hallucinations are similar to negative automatic thoughts in depression or intrusive thoughts typical of obsessive-
compulsive disorder. However, they are experienced as loud, external, ‘real’ and true because people with schizophrenia have a propensity
for auditory imagery, a tendency to attribute unusual experiences to external factors (an external bias), and a tendency towards premature
closure and deficient reality testing. That is, they hear their negative automatic thoughts as loud, attribute them to an external source,


and do not check out the validity of their beliefs against alternatives, for example that these are their own loud thoughts, the content of
which may not be valid. Auditory hallucinations are often incorporated into delusional systems that may maintain them. For example, an
individual who hears a critical, omniscient controlling voice may develop paranoid delusions about being persecuted by the owner of the
voice, which in turn may raise their arousal level and so make further hallucinations more likely. Individuals may try to control voices by
engaging in safety behaviours such as isolating themselves. These safety behaviours may reduce hallucinations in the short term, but in
the long term may lead to stressful loneliness and this may cause further hallucinations. In CBT service-users learn to identify and control
stresses that trigger auditory hallucinations, to give up safety behaviours that maintain hallucinations and to reappraise the source of their
‘voices’ and the content of what they say.

From a CBT perspective delusions are beliefs or inferences about events or experiences (including hallucinations) which in turn affect
mood and behaviour, in the same way that negative automatic thoughts and dysfunctional beliefs affect mood and behaviour in depression
and anxiety disorders. However, in schizophrenia delusions develop within the context of markedly reduced cognitive resources which limit
the capacity to modify them. The content of delusions is influenced by dysfunctional attitudes and assumptions contained in negative
schemas, by hallucinations and by cognitive biases. These include a strong egocentric or self-referential bias, a bias towards external
causation of subjective experiences, and a bias towards indiscriminate attribution of extreme positive or negative intentions to others.
For example, an individual who experiences an unusual sensation on the skin may interpret this as due to aliens activating subcutaneous
microchips to try to control their behaviour. Delusions are maintained by the belief that they accurately represent reality rather than being
testable inferences; by a bias towards focusing on information that confirms the reality of delusions and ignoring disconfirmatory evidence;
by engaging in safety-seeking behaviours that prevent the truth of delusions from being tested; and by cognitive resource-sparing strategies
such as jumping to conclusions. In CBT service-users are helped to collect evidence to test out the validity of their delusions starting with the
least strongly held ones, and then to test out the validity of the non-delusional schemas that underpin these. In order to test out delusional


beliefs service-users are also helped to give up safety behaviours, such as locking the door and disconnecting the phone when strangers are
outside their houses, in the case of people with persecutory delusions.

Within CBT, formal thought disorder (characterized by derailment, thought blocking, etc.) is conceptualized as a problematic thinking
and speaking pattern that occurs due to limited cognitive capacity arising from stress within the context of a genetic vulnerability to
schizophrenia. It is analogous to stuttering. The primary CBT intervention is to help service-users recognize thought disorder when it occurs,
the stressful situations in which it occurs, and the negative automatic thoughts that give rise to it. They are then helped to challenge these
negative automatic thoughts and so reduce the stress associated with thought disorder.

Within CBT, negative symptoms (blunting of affect, alogia and avolition) are conceptualized as ways of coping with the experience of
having limited cognitive resources and so limited expectations for success or pleasure, and problematic delusional beliefs or hallucinations.
If an individual finds it difficult to think clearly, expects little success or pleasure, believes that his actions are being controlled by others, and
hears voices telling him that he is useless, then it is understandable that he will be relatively inactive. In CBT behavioural experiments are
set up in which service-users set goals, engage in activities and monitor their experience of pleasure, success and self-control as they achieve
goals.

Controlled trials and meta-analyses show that CBT has a small to moderate effect, particularly on delusions and hallucinations, in
medicated service-users whose positive symptoms are not fully controlled by antipsychotic medication (Jauhar et al., 2014; Pfammatter
et al., 2006; Rector & Beck, 2012; Sarin et al., 2011; Tai & Turkington, 2009; Tandon et al., 2010). CBT without medication prevents the
transition to psychosis in those at risk (Hutton & Taylor, 2014). Effective CBT spans about 9 months, and longer, more intense programmes
are more effective.

Cognitive deficit theory and cognitive remediation
Cognitive deficit theory proposes that functional impairment in psychosis is due largely to cognitive deficits, and therefore ameliorating


cognitive deficits through cognitive remediation training will improve functional impairment. Neuropsychological investigations have
shown that about three-quarters of people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders show significant cognitive deficits (Bora & Murray, 2014;
Bozikas & Andreou, 2011; Fusar-Poli et al., 2012; Harvey, 2013; Palmer et al., 2009; Savla et al., 2008). On average the overall IQ of people
with schizophrenia is about 1 standard deviation below the normative mean, although there is considerable heterogeneity between persons
and within cases over time. In people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, most cognitive functions are affected including attention, memory,
processing speed, cognitive flexibility, social cognition and executive function. Episodic memory and processing speed are the areas where
greatest deficits occur. While about a quarter of people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia show no cognitive deficits, a distinct subgroup
show very severe general cognitive deficits (similar to Crow’s (1985) type 2 schizophrenia or Kraepelin’s (1899) dementia praecox), and the
remainder show variable patterns of specific cognitive deficits (more in keeping with Bleuler’s (1911) views on ‘loosening of associations’
and other specific deficits in schizophrenia). Many people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia show mild premorbid cognitive deficits, followed
by a steep decline in cognitive functioning during psychotic episodes, with some amelioration of cognitive deficits during remission and
relative stability over the long term. In many cases cognitive deficits have a significant impact on social and occupational adjustment
and illness management, and response to psychosocial interventions such as social skills training and supported employment (Kurtz,
2011). In people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, cognitive deficits are subserved by the many structural and functional neurobiological
abnormalities mentioned in earlier sections.

Cognitive remediation or rehabilitation therapy is a set of cognitive drills which aims to help service-users in remission enhance their
attention, memory and executive functions or develop strategies for compensating for their cognitive deficits so that they can better achieve
their recovery goals (Harvey, 2013; Tomas et al., 2010). In this type of treatment service-users engage in regular computer-based or paper
and pencil-based training tasks and puzzles for a number of times each week over a period of months. Specific tasks are deigned to improve
specific targeted deficits such as memory. Task difficulty is designed so high success rates are achieved or so that errorless learning occurs.
Over time service-users build up their cognitive skills or develop strategies for compensating for them. With compensatory approaches,


service-users learn strategies or use memory prompts and other devices to make up for their cognitive deficits. Meta-analytic studies of
the effectiveness of cognitive remediation report moderate effect sizes on cognitive test performance and indices of daily functioning.
Significantly stronger effects on functioning occur when cognitive remediation therapy is provided with other psychiatric rehabilitation
interventions (Kluwe-Schiavon et al., 2013; Medalia & Choi, 2009; Pfammatter et al., 2006; Tandon et al., 2010; Wykes et al., 2011).

Social skill and social cognition theory

Theories about social skills and social cognition propose that limitations in these areas account for much of the functional impairment
seen in psychosis, and therefore social skills and social cognition training will ameliorate functional impairment. People with schizophrenia
typically show deficits in accurately perceiving social situations, understanding and planning what to do in them, and then responding in
a socially appropriate way. This in turn renders them vulnerable to engaging in stressful social interactions, to rejection, to avoidance of
further social interaction, and to social isolation (Fett et al., 2011; Walker et al., 2004). People with psychosis show a deterioration in social
relationships within the family, peer group, school and workplace. Social cognition theory proposes that these social problems arise from
failure to learn social skills during the normal course of development due to deficits in social cognition, specifically emotion perception,
social perception, attributional style and theory of mind (Roberts & Penn, 2013). Social skills theory accepts this premise and in addition
proposes that people with psychosis may also fail to use social skills that have been acquired because psychotic symptoms interfere with
their use (Tenhula & Bellack, 2008). The aim of social skills training is to enhance social competence and so prevent social isolation.
Social skills training is usually offered within a group therapy context and involves the development of communication, conversation,
assertiveness, medication management and social problem-solving skills. Modelling, rehearsal, shaping and reinforcement are used during
the training process. The main emphasis in on practising skills rather than talking about them (Bellack et al., 2004; Tenhula & Bellack, 2008).
Meta-analyses show that compared with medication alone, multimodal programmes which include social skills training and medication
lead to significant improvements in social skills in people with psychosis (Kurtz & Mueser, 2008; Pfammatter et al., 2006). While social skills


training emphasizes teaching concrete skills used in social interactions, social cognitive treatments aim to enhance recognition of emotions,
theory of mind and attributional style. Social cognitive interventions are not yet well enough developed for use in routine clinical practice
(Fiszdon & Reddy, 2012).

Prodromal hypothesis

The prodromal hypothesis argues that individuals at high risk for psychosis experience a prodromal set of symptoms, largely perceptual
hypersensitivity and cognitive information processing deficits, which herald the onset of a psychotic episode. These prodromal symptoms
are exacerbated by inferences and attributions made about the controllability and origins of unusual prodromal perceptual and cognitive
experiences, and these attributions increase arousal and accelerate the onset of the relapse. Cognitive behavioural interventions made
during the prodromal period which target attributions or pharmacological interventions which target alterations in perceptual and
information processing functions should, according to the theory, prevent relapse or reduce the severity of relapse (Birchwood, 1996;
Birchwood et al., 2000; McGorry & Addington, 2012).

Clinical studies have identified four stages in the development of a psychotic episode (Birchwood, 1996). In the first stage there is a feeling
of a loss of control over cognitive and perceptual processes as a breakdown in perceptual selectivity occurs. This may be accompanied by a
feeling of heightened awareness and mental efficiency and yet an inability to prevent internal and external events from invading
consciousness. A sense of anxiety (a fear of going crazy) may occur at this point. In the second stage, depression characterized by low mood,
low self-esteem, social withdrawal, poor vocational performance and vegetative features such as sleep disruption occur in reaction to the
deterioration of cognitive processes. Some individuals try to cope with this deterioration by engaging in compulsive rituals that give them a
sense that they can impose order on what is an increasingly chaotic experience. In the third stage, disinhibition occurs and individuals act
impulsively, giving free rein to aggression, self-destruction, sexual urges, wishes to travel and so forth. This impulsivity may lead individuals
to create social situations in which they become exposed to high levels of stimulation which in turn may precipitate the onset of florid


psychotic symptoms. For example, becoming involved in fights, atypical sexual encounters, or impulsively travelling a long distance may all
lead to complex unpredictable and highly stressful experiences, which will be perceived as all the more stressful because of the breakdown
in perceptual selectivity. In the fourth stage, pre-psychotic thinking occurs, with frequent perceptual misinterpretations and delusional
explanations given for them. Often these delusional explanations involve ideas of reference or paranoid ideation. Thus, as perceptual process
become more dysfunctional, individuals continue to try to make sense of their very unusual experiences by developing beliefs that are at
variance with the culture and their usual belief systems. It appears that each individual has their own unique ‘relapse signature’ with
specific experiences occurring in a unique order, but following this broad four-stage model. Learning the pattern of this prodromal phase,
and developing a relapse drill to manage the escalation of psychotic symptoms, can minimize deterioration and improve relapse
management. The shorter the duration of the untreated illness, the less likely the service-user is to relapse in the subsequent 2-year period
(Birchwood, 1996; Birchwood et al., 2000; McGorry & Addington, 2012).

The recovery model

The recovery movement is being adopted as an overarching framework for mental health services internationally (Amering &
Schmolke, 2009; Roe & Davidson, 2008; Slade, 2009; Wykes & Drake, 2012). Kraepelin’s (1899) conceptualization of schizophrenia as a
neurobiological disorder with a chronic declining course led to the development of long-term institutional care and a reliance on physical
treatments, including medication, as the main interventions for schizophrenia during much of the 20th century. This in turn led to the
institutionalization of ‘psychiatric patients’ and the gradual erosion of their civil rights within institutions. It also led to their stigmatization
and marginalization within society. A further consequence of Kraepelin’s position was a reduced emphasis on the role of trauma and stress
in the aetiology of schizophrenia and the value of psychosocial interventions in its treatment. It was in response to this position that the
recovery model emerged at the end of the 20th century and the dawn of the new millennium.


The recovery movement initially arose from service-user groups and mental health professionals involved in rehabilitation, but more
recently has become adopted internationally as a best practice framework for service delivery. The model conceptualizes the recovery
process as a personal journey from psychosis to mental health, and privileges the concepts of optimism, well-being, personal strengths,
supportive relationships, collaboration, personal choice, adaptive coping, developing a meaningful life, civil rights, empowerment and
inclusion. The recovery model has been inspired by longitudinal research which showed that chronic decline in schizophrenia was not
inevitable (Girgis & Abi-Dargham, 2012; Hafner et al., 2008), that trauma and stress play a role in the aetiology of schizophrenia (Bebbington
& Kuipers, 2008; Matheson et al., 2013), and that psychosocial interventions have an important place in facilitating recovery from psychosis
(Mojtabai et al., 1998; Pfammatter et al., 2006). The recovery movement embraced these research findings, placing a strong emphasis on
professionals working collaboratively with service-users to help them achieve their preferred goals. There was a shift in emphasis from
institutional to community care, and from remediating patient deficits to fostering service-user-strengths. There was also an emphasis on
the civil rights of patients to make choices about their preferred treatments and to have an inclusive place in society. The recovery movement
has created a context for the development of innovative community-based approaches to mental health service delivery, such as early
intervention, the strengths-based case management model, assertive community treatment and vocational rehabilitation.

Early intervention for psychosis

Early intervention services for those at risk for psychosis or during first episode psychosis were pioneered by Pat McGorry in Melbourne,
Australia Jackson & McGorry, 2009; McGorry & Addington, 2012). These services, as originally conceived, are designed to meet the needs
of service-users at three different stages in the development of, and recovery from early psychosis. Stage 1 services aim to detect those at
ultra-high-risk for psychosis during the prodromal period and prevent its onset. Stage 2 services treat service-users during their first episode
of psychosis and aim to minimize the duration of untreated psychosis and the duration of first psychotic episodes. Stage 3 services aim to
promote recovery during the critical 5-year period following diagnosis. In the first stage, specialist assessment instruments for detecting


those at high risk for psychosis such as those listed at the top of Table 25.7 are used. In all three stages of early intervention services
case management, CBT, psychoeducational family therapy, and medication are the four key elements of treatment. With case management,
the aim is to monitor symptoms, foster treatment adherence, and support the service-user in practical ways which promote recovery
and minimize the impact of psychosis on relationships, education, employment, financial security and accommodation stability. CBT and
medication are used to help service-users control psychotic symptoms. Psychoeducational family therapy aims to support families and help
them support service-users’ recovery. There is growing evidence for the effectiveness of early intervention services for those at high risk for
psychosis and with first episode psychosis (Alvarez-Jiménez et al., 2012; Bird et al., 2010; McFarlane et al., 2012; McGorry & Addington, 2012;
Onwumere et al., 2011; Stafford et al., 2013; Van der Gaag et al., 2013; Zdanowicz et al., 2014).

The strengths-based case management

The strengths-based case management model was developed by Charles Rapp at the Kansas School of Social Welfare. Within this model
professionals work in partnership with clients and their families to help them recover (Rapp & Goscha, 2006, 2008). The model is guided by
six principles. First, people with psychosis can recover and transform their lives. Second, the primary focus of clinical work is on strengths
rather than deficits. Third, the community is a source of resources that may facilitate recovery. Fourth, case managers are guided by service-
user’s preferences and only implement plans with their approval. Fifth, the community is the primary setting for case management. Sixth, a
strong therapeutic relationship between the case manager and service-user is essential for recovery.

There are four stages in the model: the engagement phase, strengths assessment, creating personal plans, and resource acquisition and
disengagement. In the engagement phase, the therapist forms a strong and respectful, collaborative therapeutic alliance with the client.
Assessment focuses predominantly on evaluating clients personal strengths and strengths they can access in their environments. Strengths
are identified in domains of the daily living situation, finances, education or work, social support, health, leisure, recreational activities, and
spiritual or cultural activities. Strengths assessment forms the basis for the client and case manager setting goals and planning an agenda


of things clients wish to achieve. To address this agenda, clients are helped to acquire the necessary community resources and supports
for implementing their recovery plans which will increase their reintegration into community life. As clients’ autonomy increases and is
sustained, and as clients come to live more independently in the community, the process of gradual disengagement is negotiated. A series
of empirical evaluations has shown that this strengths model, when implemented with adequate fidelity, is more effective than routine
psychiatric services in promoting recovery from psychosis (Rapp & Goscha, 2008).
Table 25.7 Psychometric instruments for the assessment of psychosis and related constructs
Construct Instrument Publication Comments
High risk for Comprehensive Assessment of Yung, A., Yuen, H., McGorry, P., This semi-structured interview has
psychosis At-Risk Mental States (CAARMS) Phillips, L. J., Kelly, D., Dell’olio, subscales for positive symptoms,
M., ... Buckby, J.(2005). Mapping — cognitive change, emotional
the onset of psychosis: The disturbance, negative symptoms,
Comprehensive Assessment of At- behavioural change, motor or physical
Risk Mental States. Australianand changes and general psychopathology.
New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
39, 964-971.
Structured Interview for Miller, T., McGlashan, T., Rosen, This semi-structured interview
Prodromal Syndromes J., Somjee, L., Markovich, P. assesses prodromal symptoms, global
(SIPS)Scale of Prodromal J., Stein, K., & Woods, S. W. assessment of functioning, DSM
Symptoms (SOPS) (2002). Prospective diagnosis


of the initial prodrome for schizotypal personality disorder and
schizophrenia based on family history of mental illness.
the structured interview
for prodromal syndromes:
Preliminary evidence of
interraterreliability and
predictive validity. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 863-
865.Miller, T., McGlashan, T.,
Rosen, J., Cadenhead, K., Ventura,
J., McFarlane, W., ... Woods, S.
(2003). Prodromal assessment
with the structured interview for
prodromal syndromes and the
scale of prodromal symptoms:
Predictive validity, interrater
reliability, and training to
reliability. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
29, 703-715.
Diagnosis Structured Clinical Interview First, M. B., Williams, J.B.W., This structured clinical interview
for DSM-5 (SCID-5) Karg, R.S., & Spitzer, R.L.(2015). covers all schizophrenia spectrum
Structured Clinical Interview disorders (as well as mood and anxiety
for DSM-S. Clinical Version. and other disorders) and gives DSM
diagnoses.


Arlington, VA: American
Psychiatric Press.
Symptomatic change _ Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale Overall, J., & Gorman, D. This instrument assesses is sensitive
(BPRS) (1988). Brief Psychiatric Rating to symptomatic. It assesses psychotic
Scale: Recent developments symptomatology on 24 7-point
in ascertainment and scaling. scales and yields an overall index of
Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 24, _ psychopathology.
97-99.Woerner, M., Mannuzza,
S., & Kane, J. (1988). Anchoring
the BPRS: An aid to improved
reliability. Psychopharmacology
Bulletin, 24, 112-117.Lukoff,
D., Nuechterlein, K., & Ventura,
J.(1986). Manual for expanded
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale
(BRS). Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12,
594-602.
Present State Examination Tres, K., Bellenis, C., Brownlow, This scale assess short-term changes
Change Rating Scale (PSE-CRS) J., Livinston, G., & Leff, J. (1987). in symptomatology.
Present State Examination
Change Rating Scale. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 201-
207.


Positive and Negative Syndrome Kay,S.R.,Opler,L.A.,& Fiszbein, This scale assesses positive and
Scale A. (1987). The Positive and negative psychotic symptoms and is
Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) _ sensitive to symptomatic change over
for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia _ the course of treatment.
Bulletin, 13, 261-276.
Scale for the Assessment of Andreasen, N. C. (1984). Scale These scales assess positive and
Positive Symptoms (SAPS)Scale _ for the Assessment of Positive negative psychotic symptoms and are
for the Assessment of Negative | Symptoms (SAPS). lowa City: sensitive to symptomatic change over
Symptoms (SANS) University of lowa.Andreasen,N. the course of treatment.
(1982). Scale for the Assessment
of Negative Symptoms (SANS).
Iowa City: University of lowa.
Dimensional ratings Psychotic Symptom Rating Haddock, G., McCarron, J., This structured interview and
of delusions and Scales (PSYRATS) Tarrier, N., & Faragher, E.(1999). _ set of rating scales assesses the
hallucinations Scales to measure dimensions severity of aspects of delusions and
of hallucinations and delusions: —_ auditory hallucinations. The 11-
The Psychotic Symptom Rating item hallucination scale assesses
Scales (PSYRATS). Psychological frequency, intensity, duration
Medicine, 29, 879-889. disruption and beliefs about origin
and control. The 6-item delusions
scale assesses preoccupation, distress,
duration, conviction, intensity of
distress and disruption.
Delusions Maudsley Assessment of Buchanan, A., Reed, A., In this interview, delusional beliefs


Delusions Schedule (MADS) Wessely, S., Garety, P., Taylor, P., are elicited and patients give
Grubin, D., & Dunn, G. (1993). ratings for level of conviction and
Acting on delusions: II. the preoccupation. The interviewer rates
phenomenological correlates of degree of interference in everyday
acting on delusions. The British life and reaction to hypothetical
Journal of Psychiatry, 163,77-81. contradiction.

Hallucinations Mental Health Research Carter, D. M., Mackinnon, A., This semi-structured interview
Institute Unusual Perceptions Howard, S., Zeegers, T.,& Copolov, covers seven aspects of auditory
Schedule (MUPS) D.L. (1995). The development hallucinations: physical

and reliability of the Mental characteristics, personal
Health Research Institute characteristics, relationship/emotion,
Unusual Perceptions Schedule form and content, cognitive processes,
(MUPS): An instrument to perceptions of experience and
record auditory hallucinatory psychosocial issues.
experience. Schizophrenia
Research, 16(2), 157-165.
Auditory Hallucination Record Slade, P. D. (1972). The effects The AHRF is a self-monitoring form
Form (AHRF)Visual Analogue of systematic desensitization which assesses triggers for voices.
Scale (VAS) on auditory hallucinations. The presence and intensity of voices;
Behaviour Research and Therapy, environmental variables such as
10(1), 85-91. [AHRF]Hustig, H., noise, people and activity; and the
& Hanfer, R. (1990). Persistent quality of voices are recorded. The VAS
auditory hallucinations and their _ is used for assessing loudness, clarity,
relationship to delusions and distress and distractibility of voices.


mood. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 178, 264-267.
[VAS]
Beliefs About Voices Chadwick, P., Lees, S., & This instrument assesses beliefs
Questionnaire- Revised (BAVQ- Birchwood, M. (2000). The about voices specifically, malevolence,
R) Revised Beliefs About Voices benevolence, omnipotence, and
Questionnaire (BAVQ-R). The consequences of engagement or
British Journal of Psychiatry, 177, resistance.
229-232.
Cognitive Assessment of Voices Chadwick, P., Birchwood, M., This structured interview enquires
Interview Schedule (CAVIS) & Trower, P. (1996). Cognitive about voices, reactions to them, and
Therapy for Delusions, Voicesand _ beliefs about their identity, power,
Paranoia. Chichester: Wiley. purpose and meaning.
Interview With a Person Who Romme, M., & Escher, S. (2000) This interview covers characteristics
Hears Voices Making Sense of Voices. A Guide of voices, history of hearing voices,
for Mental Health Professionals triggers, content, beliefs about the
Working With Voice Hearers. origin of voices, impact of voices
Shaftesbury: MIND, Blackmore on quality of life, relationship with
Press. voices, coping strategies, childhood
experiences and trauma, treatment
history and social network.
Thought disorder Scale for the Assessment Andreasen, N. C. (1986). Scale TLC ratings of thought disorder
cctusttisttistiistiisisinn Of Thought, Language and forthe assessment of thought, are made based on.a psychiatric


Communication (TLC) language, and communication interview.
(TLC). Schizophrenia Bulletin,
12(3), 473-482.
Comprehensive Index of Marengo, J. T., Harrow, M.,Lanin- _ Bizarreness of thoughts are rated
Positive Thought Disorder Kettering, I., & Wilson, A.(1986). froma proverbs test and the
Evaluating bizarre-idiosyncratic | comprehension subtest of the WAIS.
thinking: A Comprehensive Index
of Positive Thought Disorder.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12(3),
497-511.

Insight Insight Scale Birchwood, M., Smith, J., Drury, V., The eight items on this scale, which
Healy, J., & Slade, M.(1994). Aself- assesses insight, ask about need for
report Insight Scale for psychosis: medication; need for a doctor or
reliability, validity and sensitivity hospitalization; acknowledgement
to change. Acta Psychiatrica of the illness; and relabelling of
Scandinavica, 89, 62-67. psychotic experiences.

Favourable attitude Drug Attitudes Inventory Hogan, T., Awad, A.,& Eastwood, This 10-item self-report scale

to medication and R. (1983). A self-report scale measures attitudes to medication and

compliance predictive of drug compliance is predictive of compliance.
in schizophrenics: reliability
and discriminative validity.

Psychological Medicine, 13, 177-
183.


Significant others’ Knowledge About Barrowclough, C., Tarrier, N., This interview assess relatives

knowledge of Schizophrenia Interview (KASI) Watts, S., Vaughan, C., Bamrah,J., knowledge about diagnosis,

schizophrenia & Freeman, H. (1987). Assessing symptomatology, aetiology,
the functional value of relatives’ | medication, prognosis and
knowledge about schizophrenia. | management.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 151,
1-8.

Significant others’ Parental Stress Fadden, G., Kupiers, ., & This scale assesses the impact of

burden of care Bebbington, P.(1985). The burden psychosis on carers.
of care: The impact of functional
psychiatric illness on the
patient's family. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 150, 285-292.

Family problems Family Questionnaire Barrowclough, C., & Tarrier, N. This $0-item checklist covers
(1987). A behavioural family problems typically encountered in
intervention witha schizophrenic families with a member who has
patient: A case study. Behavioural psychosis.

Psychotherapy, 15, 252-271.
Service needs Camberwell Assessment of Need Slade, M., Loftus, L., Phelan, These instruments assess service
(CAN) M., Thornicroft, G., & Wykes, needs in areas such as mental and
T.(1999). The Camberwell physical health, drug use, social
Assessment of Need. London: relationships, accommodation,
Gaskell.Trauer, T., Tobias, G. & transport, budgeting and activities of
Slade, M. (2008). Development daily living.


and evaluation of a patient-

rated version of the Camberwell
Assessment of Need Short
Appraisal Schedule (CANSAS-P).
Community Mental Health Journal,
44, 113-124.

Recovery context Recovery Context Inventory O'Brien, T. (2014). Recovery This multi-informant instrument
(RCI) Context Inventory. Dublin: Eve. assesses the extent to which the

Available from Tom O’Brien individual's environment supports
<tobrien@eve.ie> recovery.

Functional recovery —_ University of California, San Patterson, T. L., Goldman, S., The long version of this performance
Diego, Performance- Based Skills McKibbin, C. L., Hughs, T., & Jeste, scale assesses functional recovery
Assessment (PSA) D. V.(2001). USCD Performance- in five domains (household

Based Skills Assessment: chores, communication, finance,
Development of a new measure transportation, planning recreational
of everyday functioning for activities) using standardized
severely mentally ill adults. role-play situations. The brief
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 27(2), version assesses performance in
235-245.Mausbach, B.T., Harvey, communication and finance domains
P. D., Goldman, S. R., Jeste, D. only.

V., & Patterson, T. L. (2007).

Development of a brief scale of

everyday functioning in persons


Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33(6),
1364-1372.
Personal recovery Recovery Assessment Scale Corrigan, P. W.,Salzer,M.,Ralph, This self-report instrument assesses
(RAS) R. O., Sangster, Y., & Keck, L. personal recovery hope, meaning of
(2004). Examining the factor life, quality of life, symptoms and
structure of the Recovery empowerment.
Assessment Scale. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 30, 1035-1041.
Relapse Early Signs Scale (ESS) Birchwood, M., Smith, J., This scale uses self-report and

Macmillan, F., Hogg, B., Prasad, observation to assess early signs of
R., Harvey, C., & Bering, S. relapse.
(1989). Predicting relapse in
schizophrenia: The development
and implementation of an
early signs monitoring system
using patients and families
as observers: A preliminary
investigation. Psychological
Medicine, 19(3), 649-656.

Assertive community treatment

Assertive community treatment was developed by a Leonard Stein and May Ann Test at the Mendota Mental Health Institute in Madison,

Wisconsin, to address the challenges of deinstitutionalization. It is an integrated community mental health service delivery model in which


hard-to-reach people with schizophrenia receive intensive, continuous individualized treatment, rehabilitation, and support services from
community-based multidisciplinary teams in which team members carry small case loads (DeLuca et al., 2008). Assertive community
treatment aims to promote rehabilitation and recovery, and to prevent homelessness and unnecessary hospitalization. There is a major focus
on helping service-users develop the skills to manage everyday problems of living. All therapies and services are provided by team members
and are not ‘farmed out’ to other professionals. Multimodal treatment in which evidence-based pharmacological and psychosocial therapies
are provided in an integrated way is central to this service-delivery model. Thus, evidence-based medication algorithms, adherence
programmes, psychoeducational family therapy, cognitive behaviour therapy, supported employment and so forth can be offered within the
context of assertive community treatment programmes. Teams help service-users to avoid crisis situations, and where necessary provide
rapid response crisis intervention on a 24/7 basis to prevent unnecessary hospitalizations. Services are provided to clients in their homes or
elsewhere in the community. Services are also provided on a time-unlimited basis. Team composition, training, adherence to assertive
community treatment programme fidelity guidelines and ongoing supervision is essential for the effectiveness of this approach to service
delivery. In a meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials, Coldwell and Bender (2007) found that assertive community treatment led
to a 37% reduction in homelessness and a 26% improvement in psychiatric symptom severity compared with standard case management.
In a systematic review of 25 randomized controlled trials, Bond et al. (2001) concluded that assertive community treatment substantially
reduces psychiatric hospital use, increases housing stability, and moderately improves symptoms and subjective quality of life. It is highly
successful in engaging service-users in treatment. Bond et al. (2001) found that the more closely case management programmes followed
assertive community treatment principles, the better the outcomes. While assertive community treatment services are costly, these costs
are offset by a reduction in hospital use by service-users with a history of extensive hospital use. In meta-analysis of 44 studies involving
over 6,000 service-users, Ziguras and Stuart (2000) found that assertive community treatment was more effective than treatment as usual
in reducing care costs and family burden, and in improving family satisfaction with services.


Vocational rehabilitation

Unemployment is a highly prevalent problem in schizophrenia spectrum disorders which vocational rehabilitation aims to address (Becker,
2008). Effective vocational rehabilitation involves assessment, job searching, matching available jobs to client preferences, rapid placement
in competitive employment (rather than sheltered workshops), and the provision of individualized vocational support and training while
service-users are in employment (rather than beforehand). Systematic reviews and meta-analyses consistently show that compared with
traditional approaches, such as sheltered workshop placement, supported employment doubles the chances of engaging in long-term, paid,
competitive employment (Becker, 2008; Cook & Razzano, 2005). Employed service-users typically show improved self-esteem and better
symptom control.

Service-user, self-help support groups

Service-user involvement in service delivery dates back to the 19th century (Dillon et al., 2012). In the UK the Alleged Lunatics Friend
Society (1845-1863) was the first user-led advocacy group. It was founded by John Perceval who was admitted to an asylum because of his
religious beliefs. The contemporary mental health service-user movement began in the 1970s. For example, in 1971 the Mental Patients
Association was set up in Vancouver, Canada, and the Mental Patients Liberation Front was set up in Massachusetts. In the 1990s in the UK
there was increasing involvement of mental health service-users in the National Health Service. It was within the context of the service-user
movement that self-help support groups emerged.

Self-help support groups organized by service-users arose in North America and Europe in response to clients’ dissatisfaction with the
prevailing biomedical model or psychosis, and expert-centred, medication-focused mental health services (Dillon et al., 2012; Romme &
Escher, 1993, 2000, 2009, 2012). This dissatisfaction was due to the sense of disempowerment and stigmatization entailed by such models
and services. Self-help support groups show much variability, although the share a number of common characteristics. Service-users (alone
in or in collaboration with mental health professionals) play a central role their meetings. Attendance at group meetings is voluntary.


Service-users decide how frequently they wish to attend. The agenda for meetings is open and flexible. Meetings are facilitated by
‘experience-based experts’ who have experienced psychosis alone or in collaboration with mental health professionals. The ethos of self-help
support groups is distinctive. The views of experience-based experts are privileged over those of mental health professionals. The use of
everyday language is preferred to the use of technical language to describe psychotic experiences. For example, the term ‘hearing voices’ is
preferred to ‘having auditory hallucinations’. The role of trauma in the development of psychosis and of ‘talking therapy’ as central to
recovery are emphasized. Far less emphasis is placed on the role of genetic and neurobiological factors in the aetiology of psychosis and
medication as central to remission than is the case within the biomedical model which underpins most public mental health services. Non-
hierarchical models of service delivery are preferred, since hierarchical models disempower service-users. That is, service-users and
professional service providers are viewed as more equal and alike than unequal and different. Dimensional rather than categorical
conceptualizations of psychotic symptoms are preferred, since these normalize psychotic experiences and are less stigmatizing than
categorical diagnostic models. That is, service-users are seen as normal people with solvable problems of living rather than abnormal
psychiatric patients with chronic mental illness. Acceptance and understanding of experiences such as hearing voices or holding unusual
beliefs are emphasized, rather than rejecting them as abnormal psychotic symptoms. There is optimism about recovery. There is growing
evidence for the value of service-user support groups and peer support in facilitating recovery (Doughty & Tse, 2011; Mahlke et al., 2014).

The international hearing-voices movement has championed peer support, self-help groups to promote recovery in service-users with
psychosis, and in particular with auditory hallucinations (Dillon & Hornstein, 2013; Dillon & Longden, 2012). This movement was inspired
by the research of Marius Romme and Sandra Escher (1993, 2000, 2009, 2012) in Holland, who demonstrated that ‘hearing voices’ is a
relatively common phenomenon in the general population, and in psychosis auditory hallucinations are usually linked to early trauma.
Many prominent historical figures including religious and political leaders, philosophers, scientists and artists heard voices. The movement
has Hearing Voices Networks in many countries and an international network (http://www. intervoiceonline.org/).


Assessment

Risk assessment and management

In the management of cases of suspected or confirmed psychosis, the first priority is to assess risk of self-harm or harm to others, since
prodromal impulsivity may lead to dangerous behaviour (Dutta & Harkavy-Friedman, 2012; Volavka et al., 2012). Risk of self-harm may
be managed following the guidelines in Chapter 11. Violent behaviour requires careful assessment and management following guidelines
given in Volavka et al. (2012) and Haddock (2013). The frequency, intensity and targets for violent behaviour, environmental triggers for
violence, auditory hallucinations and paranoid delusional beliefs that may trigger violence, drug and alcohol use associated with violent
behaviour, and non-adherence to medication regimes as a potential contributing factor to aggression all require careful assessment. This
assessment may be used as a basis for formulating key factors precipitating and maintaining violence. A multimodal approach involving
psychological and pharmacological interventions may be taken to the acute management of violent episodes in service-users with psychotic
symptoms. Psychological interventions aim to distance service-users from environmental factors that trigger violence (persons, places,
situations, street drugs and alcohol, etc.) by offering them a quiet room in which to talk about their needs and concerns to skilled clinician,
while making it clear that there are other staff available to support the clinician should the service-user become violent during the interview.
Intramuscular benzodiazepines and antipsychotic medications are the main pharmacological interventions used for the acute management
of violence.

Diagnostic assessment

The next priority is to clarify symptomatology. Careful interviewing using the diagnostic criteria set out in Table 25.2, and the SCID-S,
CAARMS or SIPS and SOPS listed in Table 25.7 may be used. Standardized rating scales may also be useful in assessing symptom severity


and making a diagnosis. Rating scales for the full constellation of psychotic symptomatology and for specific symptoms are listed in Table
25.7. Careful observation and a series of interviews with multiple informants over a number of sessions will typically be necessary to assess
symptomatology. Multidisciplinary involvement is particularly important in cases where service-users present with psychotic features.
From the earliest stages in these cases, teamwork between clinical psychology and psychiatry is recommended.

Differential diagnosis

When making a differential diagnosis, it is useful to first determine if psychotic symptoms listed in Table 25.1 are present. Next, consider
symptom severity. Service-users showing chronic eccentricities which fall just short of positive symptoms and thought disorder may meet
the criteria for schizotypal personality disorder. Then consider if the symptoms constitute a single symptom diagnosis (e.g. delusional
disorder or catatonia). Next, consider if the symptoms are time-limited (e.g. attenuated or at-risk psychotic syndrome, brief psychotic
disorder or schizophreniform disorder). If the individual has insight into their symptoms and they occur very briefly, this indicates the
presence of an attenuated or at-risk psychotic syndrome. Then consider affective symptoms. For schizoaffective disorder the criteria for
schizophrenia must be met, and also those for a manic or depressive episode (described in Chapter 10). Depressive or bipolar disorders
with psychotic features may be distinguished from schizophrenia spectrum disorders by taking account of the content of delusions and
hallucinations, which are usually mood congruent in affective disorders. In depression the delusions and hallucinations have depressive
content, whereas in mania they have grandiose content. Also, the onset of schizophrenia tends to be insidious, whereas the onset of major
depression with psychotic features tends to be acute. To rule out transient psychoses arising from the use of hallucinogenic drugs such as
ecstasy or LSD, extended periods of observation and a referral for toxicological tests is appropriate. Referral for an EEG can rule out temporal
lobe epilepsy as a cause of hallucinations, although in a small proportion of cases comorbid schizophrenia and seizure disorder occurs.
Usually hallucinations associated with temporal lobe epilepsy are visual, whereas those associated with schizophrenia spectrum disorders


are auditory. Referral for a thorough medical assessment is appropriate to rule out possible organic factors as the source of psychotic
symptoms.

History and key predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors

Potential predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors should be assessed by thorough interviewing following the format
in Chapter 8. Important predisposing factors include a family history of psychosis and a personal history of trauma, abuse, bullying, stress
or adversity, and associated neurobiological and psychological factors. Psychotic episodes may be precipitated by a build-up of life stresses or
hallucinogenic drug use, for example cannabis or LSD.

Psychotic symptoms may be maintained by the way in which service-users cope with trauma, stress and anomalous experiences; by
their attributions and beliefs concerning these experiences; and by their lifestyle habits, for example their substance use, lack of structure,
social isolation and living in a stressful environment. Cognitive impairment may also maintain psychotic symptoms and impede recovery.
Psychotic symptoms may also be maintained by the ways in which significant other people in service-users’ lives interact with them. High
levels of negative critical interactions or overinvolved interactions may be stressful and so maintain psychotic symptoms. Low adherence to
pharmacological and psychological treatment regimes, a poor alliance with service providers, lack of coordination among multidisciplinary
or multi-agency service providers can maintain psychotic symptoms.

Important protective factors include good premorbid functioning, an acute onset, a clear precipitant and awareness or insight into
prodromal symptoms. A better outcome occurs where there is low stress and a good social support network at home, with friends and
at work. Females rather than males have a better outcome. Where there are additional affective features or a family history of affective
disorders rather than schizophrenia spectrum disorders there is a better prognosis. Within the treatment system, cooperative working
relationships between the treatment team and the service-user and good coordination of multi-professional input are protective factors.


Treatment systems that are sensitive to the cultural and ethnic beliefs and values of service-users are more likely to help them engage with
and remain in treatment.

Instruments for assessing service need and the extent to which service-users’ environments support recovery, listed in Table 25.7, may
also be incorporated into assessment to aid treatment planning.
Formulation
When working with service-users who have psychosis, it is useful to make a general syndromal formulation, to explain how the overall
syndrome occurred, and then other process formulations which explain how specific symptoms occurred and are being maintained.
The syndromal formulation should specify how specific recent precipitating factors triggered the onset of the psychotic episode and the
historical predisposing factors that rendered the service-user vulnerable to developing the condition or key symptoms. The way in which
the condition and its symptoms are maintained by intrapsychic factors (such as beliefs and coping strategies) and patterns of interaction
with others should be specified. Protective factors which have a bearing on prognosis should also be mentioned. For process formulations
of specific symptoms (such as hallucinations or voices, delusions or unusual beliefs, and problematic behaviour such as lack of meaningful
activity), specific predisposing factors, triggers and maintaining factors may be identified for particular symptoms. These may inform the
development of specific psychological interventions, or coping strategies for addressing these symptoms.
Treatment
The approach to management of psychosis set out here is based on a view of psychosis as a recurrent episodic condition, which is currently
only partially understood, and for which there is no cure or definitive solution. However, the view taken here is recovery-oriented and
optimistic. Pharmacological and psychological treatments may alter the course of psychosis by shortening active periods and lengthening


periods of remission and reducing the distress caused by psychotic symptoms so that the service-user may lead as normal a lifestyle as
possible.

When service-users present with prodromal symptoms, first episode psychosis, or are referred for relapse management, it is best
practice to intervene immediately to reduce the duration of untreated psychosis. Early intervention is important, since if left untreated
delusional belief systems and patterns of dysfunctional behaviour involving negative symptoms may become entrenched. Furthermore,
patterns of family interaction may evolve which maintain these symptoms. The briefer the duration of untreated psychosis, the better the
outcome. Multimodal treatment should include both pharmacological and psychosocial interventions. Psychosocial intervention should be
multisystemic and target the service-user, their social network, and if appropriate other involved professional agencies. Treatment should
aim to ameliorate psychotic symptoms, reduce distress associated with them, and support the service-user and their family in their
management of the condition and promotion of recovery.

Treatment for service-users with psychosis should include the following components (Buchanan et al., 2010; Dixon et al., 2010; French et
al., 2010; Gaebel et al., 2011; Lieberman & Murray, 2012; Mueser & Jeste, 2008; NICE, 2014; Weinberger & Harrison, 2011):

+ Recovery-oriented case management to coordinate treatment and promote a return to as normal a life as possible.

+ Pharmacological therapy to control positive symptoms including delusions and hallucinations.

+ Individual or group-based cognitive-behavioural therapy focused on helping the service-user understand the disorder, cope with its
symptoms and control environmental stress levels. Preliminary cognitive remediation and social skill training may be offered for cases
where significant cognitive or social skills deficits are present, and make it difficult for service-users to engage with CBT.

+Family intervention to help family members understand the concept of psychosis and interact with the service-user in a way that is
maximally supportive and minimally stressful. This may include group-work for parents, siblings or partners to provide them with
education and support, and training in using contingency management to help service-users overcome negative symptoms.


+ Service-users may also be invited to join self-help or peer support groups to facilitate their recovery.

Progress during treatment may be periodically assessed with instruments listed in Table 25.7 for assessing symptomatic change, insight,
attitudes towards medication compliance, functional recovery and personal recovery.
Recovery-oriented case management
For each case, a coherent system for case management should be put in place. The aims of case management are to coordinate treatment
and help the service-user live as satisfying a life as possible. The membership of service-users’ multidisciplinary mental health teams should
be made clear to them and their families. There should be clarity about which team members are relatively permanent and will provide
long-term continuity of care, and which members are more transitory and will be with the team for briefer periods (e.g. psychology interns
or registrars in psychiatry on 6-month rotations). The service-user and family should be offered a schedule of appointments, with a clear
indication of whom to contact about these, and contact arrangements for managing out-of-hours crises. If akey worker system is being used,
there should be no ambiguity about who key workers are and how they may be contacted. The team should adopt an optimistic recovery-
oriented approach and offer an integrated multimodal intervention programme to promote recovery. This should include antipsychotic
medication and support in maximizing medication adherence; cognitive behaviour therapy for psychotic symptoms; where there are
significant cognitive or social skills deficits, cognitive remediation and social skills training to address these deficits; and psychoeducational
family intervention. Service-users should be encouraged to join self-help support groups. As part of case management, the team should
assess the need for practical recovery-oriented supports which would help the service-user live as satisfying a life as possible. These may
include help with solving problems concerning education, employment, accommodation, financial difficulties, leisure activities and so
forth.


Pharmacological treatment

The most widely used and most effective pharmacological treatments for psychosis are dopamine-2 antagonists. These are usually
prescribed and monitored by a psychiatrist. A distinction is made between first and second generation, or typical and atypical antipsychotic
medications. Both are dopamine-2 antagonists. Treatment with second generation antipsychotic medications such as risperidone,
olanzapine and clozapine is currently the first-line approach to pharmacological intervention for psychotic conditions, although clozapine is
reserved for treatment refractory cases due to its problematic side effects, detailed later (Kutscher, 2008; Miyamoto et al., 2012; Tandon etal.,
2010). Both first and second generation antipsychotics are equally effective, but they differ in their side effect profiles (Dolder, 2008). With
regard to effectiveness, about a half to two-thirds of patients respond to antipsychotics, and their main effects are on positive symptoms,
with limited effects on negative symptoms and cognitive impairment. Rates of extrapyramidal side effects (such as parkinsonism) and
tardive dyskinesia (an irreversible neurological movement disorder) are lower for second generation antipsychotic medication. However,
for second generation antipsychotics, obesity, raised cholesterol and risk of diabetes are more common. Ideally the lowest possible dose
of medication should be used to reduce side effects and enhance quality of life. Clozapine is an extremely effective second generation
antipsychotic, and has a positive impact on suicidal and aggressive behaviour as well as psychotic symptoms (Sajatovic et al., 2008).
However, because of its dangerous side effects, clozapine is reserved for use in treatment refractory cases or those where there are high risks
of suicide or aggression. Clozapine may cause a severe reduction in white blood cell count (agranulocytosis), and this can result in severe
infections which may be fatal. For patients on clozapine, routine monitoring of white blood cell count is best practice. Typically service-users
with schizophrenia continue to take antipsychotic medication throughout their lives. Where service-users show low adherence in taking
oral medication daily, they may be administered long-lasting slow-release depot injections (Cunningham-Owens & Johnstone, 2009; Leucht
etal., 2011).


For a considerable proportion of people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia, residual positive symptoms including hallucinations and
delusions persist. Many service-users on medication, while not actively psychotic, develop negative symptoms including restricted affect,
limited speech and a lack of goal-directed behaviour. Despite pharmacological treatment up to 80% of cases relapse within 2-5 years,
especially if low dosages of medication are used to minimize side effects (Tarrier, 1994). Some service-users may prefer not to take
antipsychotic medication because of its problematic side effects (e.g. obesity and impotence). For these reasons individual and family-based
psychological interventions are particularly important for service-users with psychosis.

Cognitive-behavioural treatment

CBT for psychosis aims to help service-users manage stressful situations that might exacerbate psychotic symptoms; minimize distress
associated with hallucinations and other psychotic experiences; reduce the negative impact of delusional beliefs; manage negative
symptoms; and prevent relapse. CBT for psychosis has been well described in treatment manuals (Beck et al., 2009; Chadwick et al., 1996;
French et al., 2010; Gumley Schwannauer, 2006; Hagen et al., 2011; Kingdon & Turkington, 2005; Morrison et al., 2004; Steel, 2013).
CBT may also be used to help service-users with psychosis manage comorbid depression, anxiety disorders, and substance use following
practices described in Chapters 9, 13-18, and 24. CBT should span about 6 months with weekly sessions for 3-4 months, followed by
fortnightly sessions. Psychotic experiences should be conceptualized as being on a continuum with normal experience and normalized. An
optimistic, recovery-oriented approach should be adopted

CBT for psychosis begins with a thorough fine-grained ABC contextual assessment of each specific symptom, taking account of antecedent
activating events (As); beliefs and associated cognitive distortions and misattributions (Bs); and resultant distressing emotional responses
or maladaptive behavioural consequences (Cs). During this fine-grained cognitive-behavioural analysis, 10-point visual analogue scales are
a particularly useful way to assess the magnitudes of beliefs (Bs) and consequences (Cs) arising from these beliefs. Beliefs about voices heard
as auditory hallucinations (which in cognitive behavioural terms may be defined as activating events) may be assessed as varying along a


number of dimensions. Voices may be construed as benign or malevolent; controlling or impotent; all-knowing or knowing little about the
person; and the person may feel compelled to do what the voice says or not. Delusions (which in cognitive-behavioural terms are defined
as beliefs) may vary in the degree of conviction with which they are held (from great certainty to little certainty) and preoccupation (the
amount of time spent thinking about the belief). For both hallucinations and delusions, the amount of emotional distress they cause in
terms of anxiety, depression, anger and so forth may be rated on 10-point visual analogue scales; so also may behavioural responses such as
avoidance, level of activity or aggression.

A variety of cognitive and behavioural methods have been developed to help manage psychotic symptoms. These include stimulus control
methods for altering situations that trigger symptoms, cognitive methods for addressing hallucinations and delusional belief systems,
and coping skills training. It is useful when engaging service-users with psychosis in CBT to determine which psychotic symptoms cause
the most distress, and offer to help exploring ways of reducing this distress. An extended period of two to six sessions may be required
to establish sufficient understanding and trust to introduce challenges to the service-user’s psychotic belief systems. In early sessions
with service-users who have little or no insight into the non-veridical nature of their hallucinations and delusions, it may jeopardize the
engagement process to offer psychoeducation about diathesis stress models of psychosis. This type of intervention is probably best left until
a strong therapeutic alliance has been developed and the service-user has made some progress in modifying their psychotic symptoms and
the distress associated with them.

Stimulus control

With stimulus control methods, identify specific situations which precipitate distressing hallucinations or intense preoccupation with
distressing delusions. Isolate aspects of these situations which trigger greatest distress. Finally, use a systematic problem-solving approach
to develop strategies to manage these triggers and reduce distress in these situations. That is, brainstorm all possible solutions; identify pros
and cons of each of these; select the most promising; try this; evaluate outcome and modify to improve its effectiveness if necessary. Where


high levels of auditory stimulation precipitate hallucinations, the use of earplugs or calming music listened to through headphones from
a personal stereo may reduce this, thus reducing the frequency of hallucinations. Where anxiety or hyperarousal due to perceived external
environmental pressures is associated with distressing hallucinations, systematic desensitization to perceived environmental pressures
may be used to eliminate the antecedent (arousal) which precipitates hallucinations. To do this, establish the level of distress (on 10-point
visual analogue scales) associated with hallucinations that occur in a range of triggering situations. Arrange these triggering situations into
ahierarchy from the least to most distressing. Train the client in relaxation skills, and desensitize them to each item in the hierarchy, starting
with the least distressing using systematic desensitization procedures. This involves coaching the client in relaxation exercise (described in
Table 3.5 in Chapter 3). Then, when the client is in a relaxed state, expose them to each trigger or situation in the hierarchy one at a time
starting with the least anxiety-provoking. For each item, clients should remain exposed to the item or situation until their anxiety reduces
by at least 50%. Once this has occurred they may progress to the next item. Anxiety levels may be assessed every few minutes during
systematic desensitization by asking clients to give an anxiety rating on a 10-point scale.
Cognitive interventions
Cognitive interventions for auditory hallucinations and delusions are premised on the assumption that service-users become distressed
because of maladaptive beliefs they hold about internal stimuli (auditory hallucinations) or external stimuli (delusion eliciting events). The
thrust of therapy is to help clients weaken their conviction that maladaptive beliefs are true by accepting that their beliefs are inferences
rather than facts and then testing the validity of these inferences by examining evidence for and against them within the context of a strong
therapeutic relationship.

Cognitive interventions for distressing auditory hallucinations involve helping service- users test the validity of their maladaptive beliefs
about distressing voices which they hear. Beliefs that voices are powerful and that one must comply with them or face dire consequences are
typically the most distressing. Maladaptive beliefs about the power of voices and the necessity of complying with them may be tested out


by inviting service-users not to comply with them and notice that the dire consequences do not in fact occur. Such interventions increase
self-efficacy and promote an internal locus of control. Once maladaptive beliefs in the power of distressing voices have been weakened, it
becomes easier for clients to challenge the identity or source of distressing voices. For example, it is easier to accept that the voice is not
that of the devil if the voice cannot control the client’s every move. Before and after this procedure, ask clients to rate the level of distress
they experience when they hear their voices using a 10-point visual analogue scale. At the conclusion of the intervention, invite clients to
reflect on how their level of distress changed as a result of examining the evidence for the veracity of their beliefs about the power, necessity
to comply and source of the voice. Repeated use of this procedure will help them gradually to appraise their auditory hallucinations as less
distressing

Cognitive interventions for reducing distress associated with delusional beliefs involve eliciting these beliefs and creating a hierarchy
progressing from beliefs held with least conviction to those held with greatest conviction. A useful method for creating these hierarchies is
to ask what the service-user believes their response would be to a hypothetical contradiction; for example, ‘How would you respond if the
head of the TV station assured us both that no special messages were being sent to you through your TV?’ In setting up these hierarchies,
the conviction with which delusional beliefs are held may be rated on 10-point visual analogue scales, and then sequenced from those with
lowest to highest conviction ratings. Invite the service-user to begin by discussing the least strongly held delusional belief. Help the service-
user to list observations that support the belief. Then invite the service-user to list as many observations and arguments as possible against
the delusional belief. Help the service-user to expand this list as much as possible. Then invite the service-user to consider the evidence for
and against the delusional belief. Before and after this procedure, ask the service-user to rate the level of conviction with which they hold the
delusional belief using a 10-point visual analogue scale. At the conclusion of the intervention, invite the service-user to reflect on how their
conviction in the delusional belief changed as a result of examining the evidence for its veracity, and how any lessening of conviction in the
veracity of delusions is associated with a reduction in distress rated on a 10-point visual analogue scale.


Coping skills training
With coping skills training the aim is to help the service-user develop confidence in using effective strategies to cope with specific psychotic
symptoms. The client is invited to make a list of distressing and frequently occurring psychotic symptoms such as hearing distressing voices
or becoming preoccupied with distressing delusional beliefs. One symptom at a time is selected as a focus for coping skills training. The
selected symptom must be one for which the service-user is currently using a positive coping strategy such as those listed in Table 25.8. With
appropriate planning and agreement, using the typical antecedent for the occurrence of the symptom, the service-user is encouraged to
demonstrate the symptom and the coping strategy. The service-user is then invited to rate the effectiveness of the strategy in controlling the
symptom on a 10-point scale. This procedure is repeated until the service-user can face the situation that elicits the symptom and cope with
it with ease. When a coping strategy is difficult to practise within a session, the patient may practise it in imagination and then practise it in
vivo as homework. This may be done with family support. Service-users may be invited to keep a record of strategy use and its effectiveness
as homework to be reviewed in subsequent sessions. Where possible, two strategies should be developed for managing each symptom. For
example, attention switching and relaxation could both be used to reduce auditory hallucinations.
Table 25.8 Positive and negative coping strategies used to manage psychotic symptoms
Sensory strategies + Reducing sensory input, by for example, going somewhere less noisy and stimulating
Cognitive strategies + Distraction or attention switching + Focusing or attention narrowing ¢ Self-instruction to act a particular
way * Self-instruction to re-attribute the cause of a particular event - Engaging in conversation with
hallucinated voices


Behaviour strategies + Increase physical activity levels by for example exercising + Increase social activity level by for example
talking to someone + Modulating social activity level by temporary break from social interaction + Testing
out beliefs by checking if the facts fit with beliefs about causes or interpretations of events ~ Social isolation
and withdrawal - Directing aggression towards self or others
Physiological strategies + Using relaxation skills to reduce tension ~ Using drugs or alcohol to reduce tension
Note: Adapted from Tarrier (1994).
CBT-based relapse prevention
In CBT, relapse prevention involves helping clients learn their cognitive, affective and behavioural relapse signatures and then develop
relapse drills to manage potential relapse situations (Birchwood et al., 2000; Gumley & Schwannauer, 2006). Difficulty concentrating and
planning, strange sensations, and thought content that verges on the delusional are common cognitive changes before a relapse. Increased
negative mood states such as anxiety, depression and irritability, or increased feelings of religiosity and powerfulness are common
emotional precursors of a psychotic episode. Difficulty planning, following routines, sleeping, eating, managing personal hygiene and
maintaining normal conversations are typical behavioural changes that occur before a relapse. To deal with relapses, service-users may be
invited to write down their relapse drill which includes (1) a detailed description of the cognitive, emotional and behavioural elements of
their personal relapse signature; (2) the specific strategies that they will use to cope with prodromal symptoms; and (3) phone numbers of
key workers they can call to help them implement their strategy. Useful coping strategies include withdrawing from stressful situations,
practising relaxation exercises, distracting oneself from upsetting thoughts by listening to music, challenging negative automatic thoughts,
using problem-solving skills to reduce stress, or obtaining support from a family member or key worker.
Lack of insight, lack of syndrome stability and a ‘sealing over’ recovery style may prevent service-users from learning and using their
relapse signatures to implement relapse drills to prevent relapses or minimize their impact (Birchwood et al., 2000). With lack of insight, the


service-user does not conceptualize their psychotic episode as unreal. In these instances, it may be helpful to engage the family in learning
the relapse signature and drill. With syndrome instability, there is great variability in the onset of each psychotic episode because of the
person's emotional reaction to it, or because of behavioural reactions such as engaging in comorbid substance misuse. In these instances
each relapse is viewed as an opportunity to learn more about the relapse signature and to better manage emotional and behavioural
reactions to it. With a ‘sealing over’ recovery style, the service-user views the psychotic experience as alien to them, and when it is over
the service-user isolates the experience from their identity in a rigid uncompromising way. The clinical challenge is to form a strong
enough therapeutic alliance in such cases to help service-users develop a recovery style characterized by integration. Here service-users see
a continuity between their psychological functioning and identity before, during and after the psychotic episode. They assume personal
responsibility for understanding and managing the changes that occur in psychological functioning at the onset of psychotic episodes, and
adopt a flexible approach to recovery.

Cognitive remediation

Where service-users show deficits in attention, memory, processing speed, cognitive flexibility, social cognition and executive function and
these compromise their capacity to engage in CBT or develop normal living routines, cognitive remediation may be offered. With cognitive
remediation, service-users engage in regular computer-based or paper and pencil-based training tasks and puzzles for a number of times
each week over a period of months (Tomas et al., 2010; Wykes & Reeder, 2005). Specific tasks are designed to improve specific targeted
deficits such as memory. Task difficulty is designed so high success rates are achieved or so that errorless learning occurs. Over time service-
users build up their cognitive skills or develop strategies for compensating for their deficits.

Social skills training

Where service-users show social skills deficits that compromise their recovery they may be offered social skills training (Bellack et al.,
2004). This is usually offered within a group therapy context, and involves the development of communication, conversation, assertiveness,


medication management and social problem-solving skills. Modelling, rehearsal, shaping and reinforcement are used during the training
process.
Family intervention
The aim of psychoeducational family therapy is to reduce family stress and promote recovery (Falloon et al., 1993; Kuipers et al., 2002;
McFarlane, 2004). Families are helped to understand psychosis and address the challenges associated with recovery in a constructive way.
Ideally programmes span 9-12 months and are offered in a phased format with 3 months of weekly sessions; 3 months of fortnightly
sessions; 3 months of monthly sessions; and 3 monthly reviews and crisis intervention as required. Treatment may be offered to individual
families, or to groups or families in a multifamily therapy format for parents, siblings and partners. Here a detailed account of an approach
to family therapy for individual families will be offered first, followed by a brief description of how to conduct multifamily therapy for
groups of family members. With respect to the content and process of treatment programmes, a number of core elements typify effective
family-based interventions for service-users with psychosis. First, during the engagement phase an emphasis is placed on blame reduction,
the positive role family members can play in the recovery of the service-user with psychosis, and the degree to which family therapy
will alleviate some of the family's burden of care. Second, effective family intervention programmes include psychoeducation based on a
diathesis-stress model, and target unique challenges families face in coping with psychosis in their specific situation. Third, medication
adherence is addressed. Fourth, family members learn to use communication and problem-solving skills rather than destructive interaction
styles motivated by anger and guilt. Fifth, parents are encouraged to use an authoritative parenting style in helping young adults
with psychosis normalize their lives. Sixth, self-care among non-symptomatic family members is emphasized. Finally, most programmes
incorporate a variety of family therapy techniques such as externalizing the problem, reframing and relapse prevention.

Effective family therapy begins with a thorough assessment. Specific instruments for assessing family knowledge of schizophrenia, family
problems associated with caring for a person with schizophrenia and burden of care for the family are listed in Table 25.7. Patterns of family


interaction that have evolved around the client’s symptoms which may exacerbate psychotic symptoms should be assessed in particular
detail. For example, careful interviewing about episodes during which symptoms occur may show that other family members regularly
criticize the service-user’s delusional ideas and in doing so make them more entrenched, or inadvertently reinforce hallucinations by
responding to hallucination-related distress in an overinvolved way. Intervention plans may be based on formulations that arise from family
assessment.
Engagement
During the engagement phase, adopting a non-blaming stance with respect to parents is particularly important since many parents
inappropriately blame themselves for the occurrence of their child's symptoms. Family therapy is described as a set of meetings within
which parents, siblings and partners can discuss how best to help the service-user with psychosis recover and begin to lead as normal and
satisfying a life as possible. Psychosis is described as a condition which arises from the interaction of a vulnerability towards the disorder
with a build-up of life stress. Evidence for both the predisposition and the build-up of life stress may be drawn from the family and personal
history taken during assessment. Effective recovery involves taking medication and developing a normal but low-stress lifestyle. This
theme is revisited frequently throughout treatment. The rationale for family therapy is that living with a service-user who has psychosis
is stressful and implementing a home-based care plan is demanding and complex, and families may benefit from guidance with this. Also,
service-users with psychosis are sensitive to stress from others - for example, the sort that is expressed when someone has had a hard day -
and a family support programme may help families develop skills to shield the person with psychosis from this type of spillover.

The family is invited to participate in a series of sessions at their home or in the clinic to help them understand the condition and how best
to manage it and promote recovery. This invitation may be met with resistance since families may have had negative therapy experiences in
the past, be suspicious of the therapist, or fear being blamed or making things worse. When faced with resistance, be persistent and regularly


represent the invitation to participate in therapy; be positive and concerned in all contacts with family members at which invitations to
engage in therapy are offered; and be flexible about the time and place where appointments are offered

In conducting home-based family sessions, convey to the family that the sessions are occasions for working on methods for handling
problems rather than social visits. The main dangers to be avoided are being so business-like as to be rude on the one hand and allowing
casual social conversation to take over the session on the other. During home-based sessions arrange for the TV, radio, phones and other
distractions to be turned off.

During both home- and clinic-based sessions, begin by ‘checking in’ with each person. Invite them to briefly say how they are at the
moment, and if anything significant has happened in their lives since the previous meeting. If family members have been invited to do
homework tasks in a previous meeting, review the outcome of these. In the main part of each meeting, focus on a core theme. Towards the
end of each session, offer a central message which summarizes key issues covered in the meeting, and invite family members to complete
homework tasks to be reviewed in the next session, if appropriate. Close meetings, by asking each family member for one positive thing that
they have taken from the session.

Working in a co-therapy team

Working with families of service-users with psychosis can be complex and tiring and place psychologists at risk of burnout. The family’s
emotional responses to the condition is often intense, and communication and problem-solving routines may be very ineffective because of
this. One way to cope with the demands of working with these families, without burning out, is to work with a co-therapist. For example, a
clinical psychologist might work with a community-based psychiatric nurse. In selecting a co-therapist, try to choose someone with whom
you can have a respectful, flexible and trusting working relationship. Before each session, jointly plan a set of aims to be achieved and
arrange who is to do what during the session. One way of co-working is for one therapist to be with the interviewer and the other to observe
the interview and take notes if necessary. When the observer has input to make, it is useful if this is made by discussing it openly with


the other therapist in front of the family. When both therapists have discussed the input, the observer withdraws into the role of observer
again and the interviewing therapist asks the family for their views on the issue. A second style of co-therapy involves dividing the family
into subsystems with each therapist working with one subsystem. For example, one therapist may work with the parents or partner and
another with the symptomatic service-user. Or one therapist may work with the males in the family and another with the females. A vital
part of co-therapy is debriefing after each session. Debriefing involves resolving any feelings of conflict that arose during the session between
co-therapists and also reflecting on progress that was made with the family during the session and possible avenues for future work. The
importance of resolving conflicts between co-therapists cannot be overemphasized. Often deep-seated family conflicts become transmitted
to therapists who inadvertently mirror the emotions of different family members and feel an urge to act out repetitive unproductive patterns
of interaction which characterize the family with which they have been working. Debriefing is one way to minimize this type of interaction-
pattern mirroring in the co-therapy team.

Psychoeducational sessions

In early sessions the main agenda is psychoeducation. Key points set out in Box 25.1 may be presented and discussed. Service-users and
family members may be given the handout contained in Box 25.1. During sessions the psychologist invites family members to through each
point one at a time, and for each point invites family members to say how the point fits with their experience of having a family member
with psychosis. This helps the family develop a frame of reference into which they can incorporate their experience of the service-user's
condition. Psychoeducational sessions help the family to view psychosis as a condition to which the person was vulnerable and the onset of
which was precipitated by stress. Where appropriate, this framing of the aetiology of the condition absolves the family from blame and guilt.
However, in some cases, child abuse, neglect, bullying, trauma and adversity cause psychosis. Where this has occurred, family therapy with
abusive family members is not appropriate. However, it is appropriate for supportive family members to be involved in treatment with the
person with psychosis.


Box 25.1 Psychoeducational notes for parents of children with psychosis

Notes for families with teenagers or young adults with psychosis

Psychosis is a complex condition. The person was born with a vulnerability to this condition. This vulnerability is genetically
transmitted in some cases. In others it results from prenatal exposure to infections. In others it arises from early adversity, bullying
or trauma. Symptoms occur when, during the teenage years, a build-up of life stress or conflict occurs. Details of where in the brain
this vulnerability is located and how it works are not known. Research is being done to answer these questions throughout the world.
Psychosis is an umbrella term for a number of similar and related conditions. One of these conditions is schizophrenia.

The person and the psychosis are separate. Remember how the person was before the psychosis occurred? That person is
separate from their psychosis. The person is separate from the symptoms of psychosis which are described later (thought disorder,
hallucinations, delusions, withdrawal and inactivity).

Family members have a key role to play in recovery. Recovery from psychosis involves the family and the person with psychosis
working together to understand and control psychosis, and recover a normal lifestyle.

One in 100 people get schizophrenia over the course of the lifetime in all countries in the world.

One of the symptoms of psychosis is thought disorder. People with psychosis may talk a great deal but appear to lose the thread
of what they are saying so that it’s hard to understand what they mean. This is because they have lost the ability to control the amount
of thoughts that they think and to put their thoughts in a logical order. Other times they simply stop talking abruptly. This is because
they have the experience of their mind going blank. The experience of thought disorder is very frightening. People with psychosis may
worry a good deal about it and try to make sense of it in strange ways. Sometimes they may blame someone for putting thoughts into


their head, because it feels too full of ideas. Other times they may blame someone for robbing their thoughts because they experience
their mind going blank.

Another symptom of psychosis is auditory hallucinations. People with psychosis may hear voices that sound like a running
commentary or like two people conversing about them or like someone talking to them. This is a very frightening experience when
it first happens. People who hear voices may try to make sense of them by attributing the voices to a transmitter, the TV, God, aliens
or some other source. Sometimes people who hear voices shout back at the voices to try to make them stop. Other times they feel
compelled to follow instructions given by the voices.

A third symptom of psychosis is delusions. People with psychosis may hold strong beliefs which are implausible to members
of their families or community. For example, they may believe that they are being persecuted by hidden forces or family members or
that they are on a mission from God who speaks to them. Usually delusions are an attempt to make sense of hallucinations or thought
disorder. People with delusions usually refuse to change these even in the face of strong evidence that their position is implausible.

Problems with emotions may also occur in psychosis. People with psychosis often withdraw and show little affection or
love. They may also have outbursts of laughter or anger which appear to be inexplicable. These outbursts are often in response to
hallucinations. Withdrawal may reflect a preoccupation with hallucinations or the intense experience of a high rate of uncontrollable
thought. Occasionally people with psychosis realize how the condition has damaged their lifestyle and relationships. This may result in
depression. On other occasions they may deny that any changes have occurred and be overly excited and optimistic.

Problems with withdrawal, daily routines and hygiene may also occur. People with psychosis may have little energy, sleep a
great deal, avoid the company of others and pay little attention to washing or personal hygiene. This is partly because the experiences
of thought disorder and hallucinations and attempts to make sense of these experiences through delusions have left them exhausted
and with the realization that they no longer know how to fit in with other people. They may also have feelings that they cannot control
and direct their own behaviour. Because withdrawal, poor hygiene and a breakdown in daily routine are symptoms of psychosis, it is


unhelpful to criticize a person with psychosis for not making major changes in these areas rapidly. A gradual approach to change is
helpful

Some symptoms of psychosis are treatable with medication. Medication may help a person with psychosis control thought
disorder, hallucinations and delusions. Some people get their medication in pills and others get it by injection. Some people want to stop
taking medication because it has side effects such as shaking or feeling restless. It is important to take the pills or the injection following
the medical team’s directions. People who stop taking medication may feel fine for weeks or months but then they may relapse because
they have not enough medication in their body to keep them from relapsing. Unfortunately, medication may have short- and long-term
side effects. There may be weight gain. Medication can also lead to a peculiar movement disorder called tardive dyskinesia involving
strange facial movements and hand movements. These long-term side effects can be reduced if a lower dose of medication is taken.

Cognitive behaviour therapy or CBT may help people with psychosis learn to control some symptoms and require only a low
dose of medication. For people on low doses of medication, hallucinations, delusions and thought disorder can to some degree be
brought under control by learning special skills in CBT. The social skills necessary to control the symptoms of withdrawal, poor hygiene
and a breakdown in daily routines can be learned through specialized individual or group social skills training.

Self-help groups, for example Hearing Voices Network groups, may empower people with psychosis and aid recovery. In these
groups, people with psychosis see that they are not alone in their experience of psychosis, and learn how to live with experiences like
hearing voices experiences in a constructive way.

Family therapy may help families to support people with psychosis and reduce stress in their lives. Family therapy helps
families to help people with psychosis feel supported and understood. It also helps them learn how to reduce stress. With high support
and low stress, fewer relapses will occur and less medication will be needed. The key to high support is to avoid criticism and avoid
showing excessive worrying about the well-being of the person with psychosis. One way to start doing this is to spend more time each
day in separate rooms so that you do not get on each other’s nerves or cause each other to worry. Talk to each other in low-key ways. Try


not to show extreme frustration or worry. The key to taking a low stress approach to recovery is to do the following. Make small changes
one at a time. Decide on all changes in a calm way. Communicate clearly and simply about these changes. Make home life predictable.
Most people with psychosis can live an independent life. For many people psychosis is a chronic condition like diabetes. Most

diabetics, if they take their insulin, live relatively independent lives. The same is true for most people with psychosis. One in four make a

complete recovery from their first episode and do not relapse. A further one in four live relatively independent lives but relapses occur at

times of stress or when medication is stopped against medical advice. Between episodes, people with psychosis may be more withdrawn

than they used to be before the onset of the condition. Under half have significant long-term adjustment problems. Recovery is the

central aim of all treatment for people with psychosis. The aim is to help young people recover their lives.
As part of psychoeducation a distinction is made between the service-user and the psychotic condition from which they suffer. Describing
the service-user as separate from psychosis creates a context within which the service-user and other family members may join together to
understand and control psychotic symptoms and work towards recovery. The family come to see the service-user as ‘a good person with a
bad condition’. The family come to see their mission as helping the service-user recover a normal and satisfying lifestyle, and minimize the
effect of psychosis on it. This process of externalizing the problem by defining the service-user and the psychosis as separate reduces the
tendency of family members to blame the service-user for their psychotic symptoms.

The explanation of the positive symptoms (hallucinations, delusions and thought disorder) in concrete terms helps the family empathize
with their symptomatic service-user and so paves the way for a reduction in criticism. The explanation of the negative symptoms (flattened
affect, withdrawal, lack of volition, hygiene problems) and their lack of response to medication helps the family avoid critical or hostile
attempts to persuade the symptomatic service-user to instantly conform to their expectations in these areas. The outline of the roles of
medication, individual CBT, self-help groups and family therapy offers a clear rationale for taking steps to ensure that the service-user takes


medication and that therapy sessions are attended. The information on family treatment clarifies for family members that therapy will
focus on helping parents, siblings and partners to reduce stress and increase support for their symptomatic family member. Finally, the
information on prognosis offers the family hope by drawing an analogy between diabetes and psychosis as a chronic condition, which with
proper management can lead to recovery and an independent lifestyle. Implicit in this overall psychoeducational approach is the idea that
psychotic symptoms are understandable, and on a continuum with normal experience.

There may appear to be a conflict between the diathesis-stress model of psychosis central to psychoeducational family therapy and the
trauma model which underpins the Hearing Voices Network self-help group approach. In psychoeducational family therapy, the role of
neurobiological vulnerability is strongly emphasized. A non-blaming position is taken towards parents who are defined as a resource to aid
recovery, and not as a potential cause of psychosis. In contrast, in the Hearing Voices Network self-help group approach, childhood trauma,
which in some instances may have involved child abuse or neglect by parents, is offered as the main explanation for hearing voices and
holding delusional beliefs. The role of neurobiological vulnerability and value of medication is downplayed in the Hearing Voices Network
self-help group approach. Service-users who attend both psychoeducational family therapy and Hearing Voices Network self-help groups
may find the differing emphases of these two positions confusing. However, the positions advocated in these two interventions are not
incompatible. Rather they have differing emphases on the roles of stress and neurobiological vulnerability in the aetiology of psychosis. It
may be useful to clarify this if service-users or families express confusion.

Medication adherence

Where service-users have difficulty adhering to medication, this is addressed in a supportive, non-confrontational way. Obstacles to
medication adherence are identified and systematic problem-solving skills used to overcome these obstacles. Some obstacles require a
practical solution; for example, forgetting to take medication may be addressed by using personal memory aids. Other obstacles, such as
not wanting to take medication because of the side effects may involve more complex solutions, such as trying lower dosages, different


antipsychotic medications with fewer side effects, or weighing up the costs and benefits of living with and without medication and
psychotic symptoms. For weight gain, weight-loss programmes may be considered.

Aims of later sessions

After preliminary psychoeducational sessions the family is invited to use sessions to develop routines and solve problems so that family life
is predictable and calm. The aim is minimize family stress and maximize family support for service-users with psychosis in their progression
towards recovery and independence.

Parents of young adults are helped to develop an authoritative parenting style marked by warmth and the gradual encouragement of
age-appropriate responsibilities and independence. In two-parent families, parents are helped to cooperate in their care of the service-user
with psychosis. Where one parent has been shouldering the burden of care, this may involve helping both parents share the load more
equally. Parents are helped to strengthen the boundary between themselves and the service-user with psychosis, so that the service-user can
move towards independence and the parents can spend more time with each other in a mutually supportive relationship. In single-parent
families, parents are helped to develop supportive links with members of the extended family and broader social network and strengthen the
boundary between the single parent and the young adult. This permits the service-user to move towards independence and the single parent
to develop an alternative focus for their energies and interests.

Where there is a high level of overinvolvement or enmeshment between one parent (usually the mother) and the young adult service-
user with psychosis, the guilt that typically underlies the overinvolvement may require considerable exploration and acknowledgement.
The psychologist’s message must be that parents don’t cause schizophrenia. However, they can help service-users recover by promoting
independence, allowing the development of autonomy and respecting the person with psychosis’ privacy.

Some of the changes described earlier are achieved by coaching family members in communication skills and problem-solving skills and
helping them to use these skills to achieve their aims.


Communication skills training

In communication skills training family members may be invited to discuss a particular issue, such as how the next weekend should be
spent, with view to clarifying differing opinions about this. As they proceed, the psychologist may periodically stop the conversation and
point out the degree to which the family’s typical communication style conforms to or contravenes the guidelines for good communication.
Good communication involves fair turn-taking. Those taking the role of speaker clearly plan what they wish to say and then make their
points clearly, in a logical order; they then check that they have been understood and offer clarification if they have not. They try to speak in
anon-blaming way. This may involve saying, for example, ‘I feel X when you do Y and I'd prefer if you did Z,' rather than ‘You always do Y,
you're so selfish!’ They also avoid ‘mind-reading’. For example, by saying ‘I'd like to know what you think,’ rather than ‘I know what you're
thinking. You're thinking I screwed up again!’ Those who take the listening role listen without interrupting, and then summarize what the
speaker said to check that they have understood the message correctly, before replying. All approximations to good communication should
be acknowledged and praised. Alternatives to poor communication should be modelled by the therapist. Typically there are problems with
all family members getting an equal share of talking time, with the symptomatic member usually getting the least. Messages may be sent
in a very unclear way or in a way that involves blaming and mind-reading. Listeners may interrupt and before replying may not check out
that what they have understood is what the speaker intended. While two sessions should be exclusively devoted to explicitly training family
members in using the communication guidelines, coaching in communication skills occurs throughout treatment. The psychologist should
acknowledge particularly good examples of clear communication and model alternatives when poor communication occurs.

Problem-solving skills training

With problem-solving skills training, as specific problems that families wish to solve arise, these may be used as opportunities for coaching


in systematic problem solving. Big problems should be broken down into smaller problems and vague problems should be clarified.
Problems may be listed and prioritized. Families have a better chance of achieving problem-solving goals if they are specific, visualizable
and moderately challenging. In prioritizing goals it is important to explore the costs and benefits of goals for each family member so that
ultimately the list of high-priority goals are those which meet the needs of as many family members as possible.

Common goals for young adults living with parents include arranging ways in which service-users can take on some age-appropriate
responsibilities, such as meeting friends, cleaning their own clothes, managing money, ensuring that they have private living space free
from parental intrusion, and taking medication regularly. Common goals for parents include arranging time that parents can spend together
without the service-user with psychosis. For service-users’ partners goals may include arranging time that they can spend doing sports or
hobbies which they enjoy.

Once the list of target goals has been agreed, ways of achieving these goals are explored. This usually involves coaching family members
in problem-solving skills. These skills include brainstorming a range of possible solutions; listing the pros and cons of these; selecting the
best option; implementing it; reviewing the outcome; celebrating success; or if unsuccessful beginning the problem-solving process again.
Family members should be asked to try to use these guidelines to solve a particular problem and this attempt is observed by the treatment
team. Feedback on problem-solving skills that were well used is given and alternatives to poor problem-solving skills are modelled by the
therapists.

Common pitfalls for family members include defining problems vaguely, trying to solve more than one problem at a time, and evaluating
the pros and cons of potential solutions before all solutions have been listed. These are important errors to correct, since premature solution-
evaluation can stifle the production of creative solutions. Often families need to be coached out of bad communication habits in problem-
solving training such as negative mind-reading where they attribute negative thoughts or feelings to others, blaming, sulking and abusing
others. At the end of an episode of problem-solving coaching, family members typically identify a solution. They may be invited to try out
this solution before the next session, and a plan to review the impact of the solution on the problem in the next session may be made.


Reframing
Strong emotions associated with guilt and grief may lead to parents, siblings and partners interacting with service-users with psychosis
in stressful ways. Reframing is an intervention that may be used to address this issue. Many parents incorrectly believe that they are
responsible for their children’s condition and feel intense guilt. This guilt may lead them to become either overinvolved in their young
adult children’s lives, to the point where they prevent the development of independence. Many mothers show this response. For many
fathers, guilt fuels an angry response, and they criticize young adults for their psychotic symptoms and related behaviour. For example,
negative symptoms such as social withdrawal or poor hygiene are the focus of this criticism. All family members experience grief at the loss
associated with a service-user having psychosis. There is the loss of the way the service-user used to be before the onset of psychosis. There
is also a sense of loss concerning the hopes and expectations that partners, parents and siblings had for the service-user which now must be
modified. Grief arising from this loss may be expressed as intense sadness, anger, anxiety and so forth.
Reframing negative statements about emotional states made by family members may be used to minimize the negative impact of intense
emotional expression on service-users recovering from psychosis. For example, if a family member expresses criticism by saying
+‘Ican’t stand you. You're driving me crazy too!”
this may be reframed as
+ ‘It sounds like you really miss the way Johnny used to be and sometimes these feelings of loss are very strong.’
If a family member expresses anxiety and overinvolvement by saying


+ ‘L have to do everything for you because you can’t manage alone!’
this may be reframed by saying

+ ‘It sounds like you find yourself worrying a lot about Johnny’s future and wondering will he be able to fend for himself.’
In response to family members’ statements like

+‘You make me so miserable with your silly carry-on. Sometimes I think what’s the point?’
A reframing may be offered as follows

+ ‘When you see Johnny’s symptoms, it reminds you of how he was before all this. Then you find your mood drops and this sadness and grief
is hard to live with.’

All of these reframings involve labelling the emotional experience as arising out of underlying positive feelings that the family member
has for the person with psychosis, such as love, attachment and concern. The reframings also describe the emotions as arising from the way
the family member is coping, rather than being caused exclusively by the person with psychosis. That is, they give the message that the
family member owns the feeling, they are not imposed on the family member by the person with psychosis. Reframing is a process that occurs
throughout therapy rather than being covered in a couple of sessions.


Conflict management

Where family members and service-users with psychosis become involved in escalating patterns of conflict which may result in violence, a
structured approach to conflict management may be used. The co-therapy team may invite the family member and service-user to outline
their distinct and separate perspectives on the issue over which they are in conflict. Once both viewpoints have been elicited, the co-
therapists may then discuss possible ways that a compromise could be reached in a respectful manner in the presence of the family, thus
modelling non-violent conflict management. If the conflict has escalated to an extreme degree, one co-therapist may meet with the person
with psychosis to find out their viewpoint and another meet separately with other family members to find out theirs. Subsequently both
factions may meet with both co-therapists who discuss the conflict in the presence of the family with one co-therapist acting as an advocate
for the person with psychosis and the other speaking as an advocate for the parents. When a successful resolution of the conflict is reached,
therapists may help families plan ways in which conflicts at home may be managed in future. These may include avoiding specific situations
that precipitate conflict; allowing a cooling-off period of a few minutes when angry exchanges occur; using turn-taking as each side presents
their position; and contacting the therapy team or the family doctor when a resolution cannot be reached.

Contingency management

Contingency management, where specific target adaptive behaviours are reinforced and non-adaptive behaviours are not reinforced, may
be used to help service-users with psychosis replace negative symptoms such as lack of goal-directed behaviour, restricted expression of
emotions and restricted or incoherent speech with more adaptive alternatives. Contingency management approaches may also be used
to help replace the behavioural manifestations of hallucinations or delusions with less bizarre behaviour. This treatment was developed
within an institutional context in the form of token economy programmes. Clients received tokens for engaging in prosocial behaviours.


Symptomatic behaviours were not reinforced and aggressive behaviour was reduced through the use of time-out. The token economy
approach to contingency management is not usually feasible for adults with psychosis living with their families in the community.
However, contingency contracts between young adult service-users and parents may be developed. Within such contracts, there is an
agreement that the attainment of certain target goals on the part of the service-user will lead to certain positive consequences.
Relapse prevention and disengagement
Signals that may herald relapse such as the build-up of life stress or the occurrence of prodromal symptoms may be discussed during the
disengagement phase. Plans for reducing stress, increasing medication, and avoiding catastrophic interpretation of symptoms may be made.
Plans for review sessions may also be discussed.
Multifamily groups for parents
The model of family therapy previously outlined is for the treatment of individual families. An alternative is to conduct multifamily groups
for parents of young adults with psychosis. Parent groups have been shown to reduce expressed emotion in families with a member with
a diagnosis of schizophrenia and an approach to running such a group is given in Kuipers et al.'s (2002) treatment manual. Parents groups
should ideally contain no more than 12 members and be of about 90 minutes’ duration, with meetings occurring fortnightly over a period
of about 9 months. They may be open or closed and ideally should be run in the evenings in a convenient location to minimize temporal and
geographic barriers to attendance. To recruit parents into a relatives’ group it is useful to meet them at their homes for a couple of sessions of
psychoeducation and then offer a place in the group as a place where they can discuss with other parents in similar circumstances how best
to manage the process of living with a young adult who has a diagnosis of schizophrenia. The specific aims of relatives groups are

+ To help lower parental criticism and overinvolvement;


+ To help parents ventilate distressing feelings of such as sadness, anger and anxiety associated with the young person's condition;

+ To provide a form for group problem solving where parents can brainstorm solutions to the various difficulties that arise from living with
an person with psychosis;

+ To provide parents with a support network to counter feelings of isolation and stigmatization.

In the first meeting the ground rules of turn-taking, support, respect, trust and a commitment to problem solving are established by the
therapist, inviting each person to briefly recount their story in about 5-10 minutes emphasizing things that they have done to keep going
through difficult times. The therapist's role is to ensure that everyone gets a fair turn, with less forthcoming members being facilitated and
the highly verbal being limited to 10 minutes maximum. All subsequent meeting should open with a round, where each person has a turn to
say what has happened since the previous meeting.

Initially themes raised for discussion in the group are practical (e.g. how to deal with poor hygiene) or educational (e.g. what happens if
medication is not taken). The therapist's role is to encourage the group to use its collective experience to solve these problems, and only offer
expert information if the group lack this. If parents agree to try a particular solution as homework, this should be reviewed in the next group
meeting.

In later sessions as trust develops, parents use the group to process distressing emotions such as guilt for possibly causing the condition;
grief associated with the loss of their child's health; anger at the unusual behaviour of the young adult with psychosis; fear that their son
or daughter will harm themselves or others; anxiety about who will care for their son or daughter later in life when they are unable to;
and anger at service providers for their inadequacies. With emotional issues, the therapist's job is to facilitate emotional expression and
processing on the one hand, while encouraging the group to support members who are processing distressing emotions by acknowledging
the value of them listening and empathizing.


Hearing voices groups
Hearing voices groups may be co-facilitated by psychologists (or other mental health professionals) in collaboration with experience-based
expert service-users, using principles and practices developed by leading figures in the Hearing Voices Network field especially Romme and
Escher (1993, 2000, 2009, 2012) and Dillon (Dillon & Hornstein, 2013; Dillon & Longden, 2012). Some of these principles and practices were
discussed in the section on service-user, self-help support groups. The model advocated by the Hearing Voices Network for setting up self-
help groups is to first host a launch event. At this the perspective on hearing voices set out in the works of Romme and Escher (1993, 2000,
2009, 2012) and summarized here is presented by experience-based expert service-users and by professionals who endorse this perspective.
Following this, in the second part of the launch event, a workshop is held in which the audience of service-users can respond to the material
in the guest lectures and express their support for setting up a hearing voices network group. Publicity about these launch events should
be explicitly targeted at those who hear voices. A report on the launch event should be sent to all participants afterwards inviting them to
become involved in the process of developing a self-help hearing voices group. If service-users are consulted from the beginning they are
more likely to participate in the group and feel some sense of ownership and responsibility. A series of meetings are held with service-users
(interested in forming a self-help group) to construct a vision and framework for the group outlining the aims, philosophy, ground rules,
structure, location, timing, relationships with professional mental health staff and so forth

At launch events and in related publicity it is important to highlight the advantages of hearing voices network groups. For many service-
users, even with medication, hearing voices is part of their daily experience. There is a growing body of research evidence which shows
that hearing voices groups and peer-support groups for service-users helps people who hear voices recover and live more satisfying lives
(Doughty & Tse, 2011; Mahlke et al., 2014; Ruddle et al., 2011). This is probably because service-users who hear voices may feel supported
and less isolated when they meet with other service-users who hear voices and talk openly about it in an atmosphere of acceptance and
respect (rather than rejection and ridicule). They may find it useful to explore the idea that accepting that hearing voices is part of who they


are, rather than a deficit to be ashamed of. They may find it useful to learn about situations and emotional states in which they are most and
least likely to hear voices, because this may give them a sense of control over the experience of hearing voices. They will have the opportunity
to develop more useful working relationships with their voices, which are not exclusively based on trying to suppress them. Developing
friendly relationships with voices can make life more satisfying. People who hear commanding powerful voices that are particularly
distressing may value discussing their coping strategies and those of other group members who hear similar voices. For these voices it is
possible to learn ways to set limits on them and reduce their power, since the only power they have is that given to them by the person who
hears them. Hearing voices groups also support service-users to reduce medication and hospital admissions; to become more active (e.g. by
exercising or shopping); to pursue valued life goals (e.g. making friends or getting a job); and to recover their lives. Information about these
advantages of participating in hearing voices self-help groups may motivate service-users to participate in setting up a hearing voices group.

For groups to have affiliated membership of the Hearing Voices Network, members must not be subject to referral, discharge or risk
assessment. The group must be defined as a self-help group and not a clinical group offering treatment, and focus primarily on sharing
experiences, support and empathy. Members must be able to attend sessions or not as they wish without repercussions. Within the group
there is an acceptance that voices and visions are real experiences, and that people are not any the less for having voices and visions. There is
respect for each member as an expert; an ethos of self-determination; a valuing of ordinary, non-professionalized language; an openness to
interpreting anomalous experiences positively; and freedom to challenge social norms and to talk about arrange of issues, not just voices and
visions. In addition to the criteria for associate membership, for full membership of the Hearing Voices Network, all members of the group
must be members of a community who have equal power. The group and not the facilitator has responsibility for group decisions, actions,
and limits of confidentiality. The facilitator does not report to anyone outside the group. The group does not meet in a clinical setting.
Members are not required to be using public health services, to be from a particular region or to commit to group membership for a particular
time period. Useful guidance on running hearing voices groups is given in Romme and Escher (2000), and in material distributed by Jacqui
Dillon at her workshops (http://www jacquidillon .org/tag/hearing-voices-network/).


The facilitator’s role in hearing voices groups is to lead by listening in a non-judgemental way, allowing all group members to have be
heard, balancing group discussion so there is a focus on positive experiences and solutions as well as negative experiences and problems,
and validating group members’ strengths and resilience. Hearing voices groups, like most other groups, evolve through stages of forming,
storming and performing. In the forming stage, the key goal is help members feel accepted, and address their concerns about fitting in to
the group by making the group feel like a safe place to be. In the storming stage, differences between group members emerge and give rise
to conflict. In this stage, the key goal is to foster tolerance and respect for differences between group members, and facilitate negotiation
about differences. In the performing stage, the key goal is to facilitate cooperation, mutual support and joint problem solving among group
members so members can learn from each other how to live more satisfying lives. For time-limited groups, there is also a closing phase
where the goal is to facilitate a constructive ending. Relationships made, lessons learned and goals achieved are celebrated. Losses are
acknowledged. Plans for addressing future challenges are considered.

In the opening session of a hearing voices group, it is mentioned that the group is a learning community - a place where people who hear
voices and who have become disempowered can learn from each other how to understand and live with their voices and how to reclaim their
lives. In order for a group to function as a learning community it is useful to set the basic ground rules for group meetings. These include the
following:

+ Confidentiality: What is said in group, stays in group.

+ Disclosure: Share what may be helpful to you or others, and don’t share things you wish to remain private.

+ Participation: The more you participate and ‘put in’, the more you ‘get out’, but there is no pressure to participate if you don’t want to.

+ Inclusion: Everyone should have a fair turn, so the more confident should sometimes hold back and leave room for shyer group members.

+ Respect: We are all different (in terms of age, gender background and opinions), and in this group we respect each other's different views,
even when we disagree.


+ Behaviour: You can behave as you wish in group, as long as it doesn’t disrupt the session.
- Timing: As a sign of respect for others, come to group on time, and come back from breaks on time.
+ Turn-taking: Speak one at a time, so everyone can hear what you are saying.

To start the group process a useful initial exercise is invite group members to share one hope and one fear that they have about the group
with the person sitting beside them; join up with another pair and share this information in groups of 4; then reconvene the whole group and
invite each person to share their hope and fear with all group members,

To explore group members experiences of hearing voices, questions from Romme and Escher’s (2000) interview may be used to initiate
discussions about characteristics of voices, history of hearing voices, triggers, content, beliefs about the origin of voices, impact of voices on
quality of life, relationship with voices, coping strategies, childhood experiences and trauma, and treatment history. Group participants may
be invited to consider who the voices represent or what problems they represent.

In reflecting on group members personal experience of hearing voices facilitators may mention that hearing voices is common. About
10% of the population hear voices. Many prominent historical figures including religious and political leaders, philosophers, scientists
and artists heard voices. The experience of hearing voices usually goes through three phases. In the initial startling phases voices occur
following severe stress, demand much attention and disrupt people's lives. At this point anxiety management, medication and support are
required. In the second phase, the organizational phase, there is an opportunity to explore the relationship between voices and both past and
present stressful or traumatic experiences. Hearing voices group meetings create a context within which to do this. In the third phase, the
stabilization phase, people learn to live in harmony with their voices and accept them as part of their lives. In this phase voice hearers are less
controlled by their voices, and are free to choose how they respond to them. The main task in this phase is solving life problems that have
arisen from hearing voices by developing supportive relationships and independence.


It may be useful to for group members to consider the main explanations for hearing voices, the solutions offered by these, their
limitations, and the extent to which they empower or disempower service-users. The biomedical, social, psychological, psychoanalytic and
recovery models may be discussed. Group members may discuss their experiences of these models, the concept of recovery or cure within
each model, and how accessible services based on these models are to service-users.

What follows are some of the principles and practices that guide hearing voices network self-help groups (Dillon & Hornstein, 2013; Dillon
& Longden, 2012; Romme & Escher, 2000). Unlike traditional psychiatric care, where the content of hallucinations is discounted as
meaningless, and so discussing this content in detail is discouraged, hearing voices groups provide a safe place for people to talk about the
taboo subject of the content of the voices which they hear and make sense of them. It is assumed that the voices which people hear derive
from trauma that they have suffered. Therefore, unlike traditional mental health services which ask ‘What is wrong with you?’ within
hearing voices groups the question asked is ‘What has happened to you?’ There is an attempt to understand the content of voices as literal or
metaphorical comments relevant to trauma experiences. Psychotic symptoms including hearing voices and delusional ideas are understood
as survival strategies, or ways of coping with life's adversities. Those who hear voices are supported in group to learn to live with their voices,
visions and tactile sensations; the messages they entail; and the trauma they have suffered. The process of no longer suppressing ‘voices’ may
lead to these becoming less frequent or intrusive. The process of exploring how particular situations and emotions are linked to ‘hearing
voices’ can help individuals develop control over their voices. Techniques for temporarily blocking voices may be discussed, These include
distraction, visualizing voices as being behind a wall or shield, relaxation, meditation, prayer and self-soothing routines. The process of
discussing one’s voices with other voice hearers reduces social isolation, fear of one’s voices, and facilitates an acceptance of voices as part of
the richness of human experience. Through engagement in hearing voices groups individuals can enhance the quality of the relationships
they have with their voices. They may set aside some time each day to talk with their voices to get to know them better (who they are, their
age, their life experiences, challenges they have faced, how they coped, etc.). They may write down things their voices tell them or express
these in art. If their voices are strong, commanding and anxiety-provoking, voice hearers can learn to set limits on them, refuse to obey their


commands, require them to be respectful, check out the validity of their predictions and so forth. Within hearing voices groups there is an
appreciation of the uniqueness and potential for recovery of each individual. There is no attempt to control group members or have them
conform to a preconceived idea of normality. There is a celebration of the fact that group members hear voices, see visions, have unusual
ideas and feel passionate emotions. In hearing voices groups facilitators and members show deep respect for each other and optimism about
the resilience and strengths that group members have to work towards recovery. However it is recognized that occasional setbacks are often
an integral part of the recovery process. Within the hearing voices movement it is acknowledged that many professionals within
mainstream mental health services dominated by the biomedical model have become disillusioned with its erosion of the civil rights of
those who hear voices. Civil rights of those who hear voices may be eroded through the use of diagnoses that define hearing voices as deviant,
through the use of medication (with negative side effects) to suppress voices, and through the inappropriate use of mental health legislation
to curtail freedom. The hearing voices movement offers professionals a format for working with clients in an egalitarian way that supports
their rights as citizens and human beings. To date there is no evidence for the effectiveness of unstructured, open-ended hearing voices
network groups, although there is growing evidence for the value of hearing voices groups informed by ideas and practices from CBT (Ruddle
etal., 2011).

Summary

Psychosis refers to conditions characterized by positive symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations; negative symptoms such as
diminished affective expression and reduced goal-directed behaviour; and disorganized thinking and behaviour. Schizophrenia is of form of
psychosis which affects just under 1% of the population. This and other conditions which share similar symptoms and genetic factors are
referred to in DSM-S and ICD-10 as schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Psychosis typically first occurs in late adolescence or early adulthood
and follows an episodic relapsing course. Up to 40% of clients show one or more periods of complete recovery with good adjustment for at
least a year, and 4-20% show complete remission. Biological theories of schizophrenia spectrum disorders point to the role of genetic and


neurodevelopmental factors in rendering people vulnerable to the development of psychosis, and to the role of structural and functional
brain abnormalities and dysregulation of neurotransmitter systems, notably those involving dopamine and glutamate, in the aetiology of
psychosis. Pharmacological interventions for psychosis are associated with this biomedical approach to psychosis. Stress-vulnerability or
diathesis-stress theories propose that psychosis occurs when neurobiologically vulnerable individuals are exposed to psychosocial stress.
Cognitive behavioural and family systems theories have led to the development CBT and family therapy interventions for psychosis.
Cognitive remediation and social skills training have been developed to address cognitive and social skills deficits common among people
with psychosis. The identification of prodromal signs has informed the development of relapse prevention interventions. The recovery
movement is being adopted as an overarching framework for mental health services internationally. It has created a context for the
development of innovative community-based approaches to mental health service delivery such as early intervention, the strengths-based
case management model, assertive community treatment, vocational rehabilitation, and service-user, self-help support groups. Assessment
premised on multifactorial diathesis-stress models of schizophrenia address predisposing, precipitating and maintaining factors within the
biological, psychological and contextual domains. Treatment programmes premised on diathesis-stress models involve recovery-oriented
case management, antipsychotic medication to address dysregulation of the dopamine system, individual CBT to enhance personal coping
with psychotic symptoms, family therapy to harness family resources promote recovery and involvement in self-help support groups.
Exercise
1, Experiential exercise: Divide into groups of three. Assign roles of voice-hearer, non-voice hearer, and ‘voice’. The voice-hearer and non-
voice hearer engage in a conversation on any topic, while the ‘voice’ sits behind or beside the voice-hearer and speaks to the voice-hearer.
The voice-hearer’s role is to try to carry on as normal a conversation as possible, given that the non-voice hearer cannot hear the voices.
The ‘voice’ should at times comment on what the voice-hearer has said, picking out and magnifying flaws or mistakes, criticizing and


attacking the voice-hearer. The ‘voice’ can also make non-speech-related sounds or other disconnected comments and observations.
Spend 5 minutes in the role-play and then change roles so that everyone has a chance to experience each role. In addition, change the
topic of conversation, for example role-play the voice-hearer being interviewed for a job. After all the role-plays, have a small group
discussion about the experience of hearing voices, focusing on the emotions, action urges, behaviours and thoughts of the voice hearer
and non-voice hearer. Do any of these experiences resemble so-called ‘positive’ and ‘negative’ symptoms?
2. Skills development exercise: Working with Brian from the case example, in groups of three, role-play the following parts of assessment
and treatment, rotating roles between observer, client and psychologist
1. First psychology appointment and assessing motivation for treatment. Challenge in particular unrealistic beliefs about
treatment and empathically point out what treatment will need from Brian. Set up some contingencies so that CBT treatment is
offered contingent on Brian engaging in a set amount of weekly structured activity outside his flat. Look at the additional resources
and supports he will need to achieve this and set SMART (specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, time-limited) goals around this.
2. Mid-treatment psychology session focused on anxiety and avoidance. Brian describes high anxiety at work and urges to leave
work mid-shift to get home to the safety of his flat and to take a benzodiazepine tablet. Explore with Brian the triggers for anxiety
(a sense of people in work communicating indirectly with nods and glances, an observation of colours (blue and yellow) that to
him represent danger). Look with Brian at a wider range of current stressors (almost out of money, running short of food, being
frequently cold in his flat, drinking at night-time again, increasing reliance on benzodiazepines to reduce anxiety, worries about
his job contract not continuing, feeling pressure to make something of himself, comparisons with friends whose lives he perceives
as having moved on, feeling lonely). Work to reframe anxiety as a normal reaction to an experience of hyper-meaning making, an
experience that he often has in response to multiple life stressors. Remind Brian of the importance of recommitting to self-care and
make SMART goals with him around this (small exercise goals, small nutrition goals). Encourage him to look at increasing daily
positive experiences unrelated to smoking and drinking (skype a friend in the evening or cycle)


Further reading for clinicians
Beck, A. Rector, N., Stolar, N., & Grant, P. (2009). Schizophrenia. Cognitive Theory, Research and Therapy. Oxford: Guilford.
Chadwick, P., Birchwood, M., & Trower, P, (1996). Cognitive Therapy for Delusions, Voices and Paranoia. Chichester: Wiley.
Falloon, L Laporta, M., Fadden, G., & Graham-Hole, V. (1993). Managing Stress in Families, London: Routledge.
French, P., Smith, J. Shiers, D., Reed, M., & Rayne, M, (2010). Promoting Recovery in Early Psychosis: A Practice Manual. Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Gumley, A.. & Schwannauer, M, (2006). Staying well After Psychosis. A Cognitive Interpersonal Approach to Recovery and Relapse Prevention.
Chichester: Wiley.
Hagen. R., Turkington, D., Berge, T.. & Grawe, R. (2011). CBT for Psychosis: A Symptom-Based Approach. Hove, UK: Routledge.
Kingdon, D., & Turkington, D, (2005). Cognitive Therapy of Schizophrenia. Oxford: Guilford.
Kuipers, L., Leff, 1. & Lam, D, (2002). Family Work for Schizophrenia (Second Edition). London: Gaskell.
Leff, J. (2005). Advanced Family Work for Schizophrenia: An Evidence-Based Approach. London: Royal College of Psychiatrists.
Lieberman, [.. & Murray, R. (2012). Comprehensive Care of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Lobban, F., & Barrowclough, C. (2009). A Casebook of Family Interventions for Psychosis. Chichester: Wiley.
Morrison, A., Renton, J. Dunn, H., Williams, $.. & Bentall, R. (2004). Cognitive Therapy for Psychosis: A Formulation-Based Approach. Hove,
UK: Routledge.
Mueser, K., & Jeste, D, (2008). Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia. Oxford: Guilford Press.


Rubin, A., Springer, D., & Trawver, K. (2010). Clinician’s Guide to Evidence-Based Practice. Psychosocial Treatment of Schizophrenia.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Steel, C. (2013). CBT for Schizophrenia: Evidence-Based Interventions and Future Directions. Chichester: Wiley.

Further reading for clients and families
Freeman, D., & Freeman, J. (2006). Overcoming Paranoid and Suspicious Thoughts: A Self-Help Guide Using Cognitive Behavioural Technique.
London: Constable & Robinson.
Healy, C. (2007). Understanding your Schizophrenia Iliness: A Workbook. Chichester: Wiley.
Hermann-Doig, T., Maude, D., & Edwards, J. (2003). Systematic Treatment of Persistent Psychosis (STOPP): A Psychological Approach to
Facilitating Recovery in Young People with First-Episode Psychosis. London: Martin Dunitz.
Kuipers, E., & Bebbington, P. (2005). Living with Mental Iliness (Third Edition). London: Souvenir Press.
Morrison, A., Renton, J., French, P.,, & Bentall, R. (2008). Think You're Crazy? Think Again. A Resource Book for Cognitive Therapy for
Psychosis. Hove, UK: Routledge.
Mueser, K., & Gingerich, S. (2006). The Complete Family Guide to Schizophrenia. Oxford: Guilford.
Turkington, D., et al. (2009). Back to Life, Back to Normality. Cognitive Therapy, Recovery and Psychosis. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Websites
APA guidelines for treating schizophrenia: http://w ww.psychiatryonline.com/pracGuide/pracGuidehome.aspx


BPS Division of Clinical Psychology Understanding Psychosis: _https://www.bps.org.uk/system/files/user-files/
Division%200f%20Clinical%20Psychology/public/understanding_psychosis_-_final_19th_nov_2014.pdf
Hearing Voices Network: http://www.hearing-voices.org/
International Hearing Voices Network (Intervoice) http://www. intervoiceonline.org/
Jacqui Dillon: http://www jacquidillon.org/tag/hearing-voices-network/
Mental Health Foundation: http://www.mentalhealth. org.uk
Mind: http://www.mind.org.uk
NICE guidelines for psychosis 2014: http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg178
PORT guidelines for schizophrenia 2009: http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/content/36/1/94.full.pdf+html
Rethink (http://www.rethink.org/
Schizophrenia Research Forum. http://www.schizophreniaforum.org/
References
Abrams, D., Rojas, D.. & Arciniegas, D, (2008), Is schizoaffective disorder a distinct categorical diagnosis? A critical review of the
literature. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 4, 1089-1109.
Ackner, S., Skeate, A., Patterson, P.. & Neal, A. (2013). Emotional abuse and psychosis: A recent review of the literature. Journal of
Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma, 22, 1032-1049.
Alvarez-Jiménez, M., Priede, A.. Hetrick, S., Bendall, S., Killackey, E., Parker, A., ... Gleeson, J. (2012). Risk factors for relapse following
treatment for first episode psychosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Schizophrenia Research, 139, 116-
128.


American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA:
Author.

Amering, M., & Schmolke, M. (2009). Recovery in Mental Health. Reshaping Scientific and Clinical Responsibilities. Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell.

Barkus, E., & Murray, R. M. (2010). Substance use in adolescence and psychosis: Clarifying the relationship. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 6, 365-389

Barrowclough, C., & Lobban, F. (2008). Family intervention. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 214-
225). Oxford: Guilford Press.

Beards, S., Gayer-Anderson, C., Borges, S., Dewey, M., Fisher, H., & Morgan, C. (2013). Life events and psychosis: A review and meta-
analysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39, 740-747.

Bebbington, P., & Kuipers, E. (2008). Psychosocial factors. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 74-81).
Oxford: Guilford Press.

Beck, A. Rector, N., Stolar, N., & Grant, P. (2009). Schizophrenia. Cognitive Theory, Research and Therapy. Oxford: Guilford.

Becker, D. (2008). Vocational rehabilitation. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 261-267). Oxford:
Guilford Press.

Bellack, A., Mueser, K., Gingerich, S., & Agresta, J. (2004). Social Skill Training for Schizophrenia: A Step-By-Step Guide (Second Edition).
Oxford: Guilford.

Berry, K., Ford, S., Jellicoe-Jones, L., & Haddock, G. (2013). PTSD symptoms associated with the experiences of psychosis and
hospitalisation: A review of the literature. Clinical Psychology Review, 33, 526-538.

Birchwood, M. (1996). Early intervention in psychotic relapse. Cognitive approaches to detection and management. In G. Haddock & P.
Slade (Eds.), Cognitive-Behavioural Interventions with Psychotic Disorders. (pp. 171-211). London: Routledge.


Birchwood, M., Spencer, E., & McGovern, D. (2000). Schizophrenia: Early warning signs. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 6, 93-101.
Bird, V., Premkumar, P., Kendall, T., Whittington, C., Mitchell, J., & Kuipers, E. (2010). Early intervention services, cognitive-behavioural
therapy and family intervention in early psychosis: Systematic review. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 197, 350-356.

Bleuler, E. (1911). Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias. Oxford: International University Press.

Bond, G., Drake, R., Mueser, K., & Latimer, E. (2001). Assertive community treatment for people with severe mental illness. Critical
ingredients and impact on patients. Disease Management & Health Outcomes, 9, 141-159.

Bora, E., Fornito, A., Radua, J., Walterfang, M., Seal, M., Wood, S., ... Pantelis, C. (2011). Neuroanatomical abnormalities in schizophrenia:
A multimodal voxelwise meta-analysis and meta-regression analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 127, 46-57.

Bora, E., & Murray, R. (2014). Meta-analysis of cognitive deficits in ultra-high risk to psychosis and first-episode psychosis: Do the
cognitive deficits progress over, or after, the onset of psychosis? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 40, 744-755.

Borges, S., Gayer-Anderson, C., & Mondelli, V. (2013). A systematic review of the activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in
first episode psychosis. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 38, 603-611

Bota, R. Munro, S., Nguyen, C., & Preda, A. (2011). The course of schizophrenia: What has been learned form longitudinal studies. In
M. Ritsner (Ed.), Handbook of Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders, Volume II. Phenotypic and Endophenotypic Presentations (pp. 281-300).
Oxford: Springer.

Bozikas, V., & Andreou, C. (2011). Longitudinal studies of cognition in first episode psychosis: A systematic review of the literature.
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 45, 93-108.

Bradley, A., & Dinan, T. (2010). A systematic review of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function in schizophrenia: Implications for
mortality. journal of Psychopharmacology, 24, 91-118.

Buchanan, R., Kreyenbuhl, J,, Kelly, D., Noel, J., Boggs, D., & Fischer, B. (2010). The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychopharmacological
treatment recommendations and summary statements. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 71-93


Cementon, E., Castle, D., & Murray, R. (2012). Schizophrenia and substance abuse. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray (Eds.), Comprehensive Care
of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 291-309). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chadwick, P., Birchwood, M., & Trower, P. (1996). Cognitive Therapy for Delusions, Voices and Paranoia. Chichester: Wiley.

Challis, S., Nielssen, O., Harris, A., & Large, M. (2013). Systematic meta-analysis of the risk factors for deliberate self-harm before and
after treatment for first-episode psychosis. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 127,442-454

Chan, R., Di, X., McAlonan, G., & Gong, Q. (2011). Brain anatomical abnormalities in high-risk individuals, first-episode, and chronic
schizophrenia: An activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of illness progression. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37, 177-188.

Clancy, M., Clarke, M., Connor, D., Cannon, M., & Cotter, D. (2014). The prevalence of psychosis in epilepsy; a systematic review and meta-
analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 14. doi:10.1186/1471-244X-14-75

Coldwell, C., & Bender, W. (2007). The effectiveness of assertive community treatment for homeless populations with severe mental
illness: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 393-399.

Cook, A. (2014). Understanding Psychosis and Schizophrenia. Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society.

Cook, J., & Razzano, L. (2005). Evidence-based practices in supported employment. C. Stout & R. Hayes (Ed.), The Evidence-Based Practice:
Methods, Models, and Tools for Mental Health Professionals (pp. 10-30). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Crow, T. (1985). The two syndrome concept. origins and current status. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 9, 471-486.

Cunningham-Owens, D., & Johnstone, E. (2009). Treatment and management of schizophrenia. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor,
& J. Geddes (Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry (Volume 1, Second Edition, pp. 578-595). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
DeLuca, N. L., Moser, L. L., & Bond, G. R. (2008). Assertive community treatment. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of
Schizophrenia (pp. 329-338). New York, UK: Guilford Press.

Dillon, J. Bullimore, P., Lampshire, D., & Chamberlain, J. (2012). The work of experience-based experts. In J. Read & J. Dillon Eds.), Models
of Madness (Second Edition, pp. 305-318). London: Routledge


Dillon, J., & Hornstein, G. A. (2013). Hearing voices peer support groups: A powerful alternative for people in distress. Psychosis:
Psychological, Social and Integrative Approaches, 5(3), 286-295.

Dillon, J., & Longden, E. (2012). Hearing voices groups. Creating safe spaces to share taboo experience. In M. Romme & S. Escher (Eds.),
Psychosis as a Personal Crisis (pp. 129-139). London: Routledge.

Dixon, L., Dickerson, F., Bellack, A., Bennett, M., Dickinson, D., & Goldberg, R. (2010). The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychosocial
treatment recommendations and summary statements. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 48-70.

Dolder, C. (2008). Side effects of antipsychotics. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 168-177). Oxford:
Guilford Press.

Doughty, C., & Tse, S. (2011). Can consumer-led mental health services be equally effective? an integrative review of CLMH services in
high-income countries. Community Mental Health Journal, 47(3), 252-266.

Downar, J, & Kapur, S. (2008). Biological theories. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 25-34). Oxford:
Guilford Press.

Dutta, R., & Harkavy-Friedman, J. (2012). Clinical management of suicidal behaviour in schizophrenia. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray
(Eds.), Comprehensive Care of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 244-261). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Ellman, L., & Cannon, T. (2008). Environmental pre- and perinatal influences in aetiology. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical
Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 65-73). New York: Guilford Press.

Falloon, I. Laporta, M., Fadden, G., & Graham-Hole, V. (1993). Managing Stress in Families. London: Routledge

Fatemi, S., & Folsom, T. (2009). The neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia, revisited. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35, 528-548.
Fett, A., Viechtbauer, W., Dominguez, M., Penn, D., van Os, J., & Krabbendam, L. (2011). The relationship between neurocognition and
social cognition with functional outcomes in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Reviews, 35, 573-588


Fiszdon, J., & Reddy, L. (2012). Review of social cognitive treatments for psychosis. Clinical Psychology Review, 32, 724-740.

French, P., Smith, J., Shiers, D., Reed, M., & Rayne, M. (2010). Promoting Recovery in Early Psychosis: A Practice Manual. Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell.

Fusar-Poli, P., Borgwardt, S., Bechdolf, A., Addington, J., Riecher-Réssler, A., Schultze-Lutter, F., ... Yung, A. (2013). The psychosis high-
tisk state: A comprehensive state-of-the-art review. JAMA Psychiatry, 70, 107-120.

Fusar-Poli, P., Deste, G., Smieskova, R., Barlati, S., Yung, A. R., Howes, O., ... Borgwardt, S. (2012). Cognitive functioning in prodromal
psychosis: A meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 69, 562-571.

Gaebel, W., Riesbeck, M., & Wobrock, T. (2011). Schizophrenia guidelines across the world: A selective review and comparison.
International Review of Psychiatry, 23, 379-387.

Gayer-Anderson, C., & Morgan, C. (2013). Social networks, support and early psychosis: A systematic review. Epidemiology and
Psychiatric Sciences, 22, 131-146.

Girgis, R., & Abi-Dargham, A. (2012). Pathobiology of schizophrenia: Implications for treatment. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray (Eds.),
Comprehensive Care of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 17-36). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Glatt, S. J. (2008). Genetics. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 55-64). Oxford: Guilford Press.
Gumley, A., & Schwannauer, M. (2006). Staying Well After Psychosis. A Cognitive Interpersonal Approach to Recovery and Relapse
Prevention. Chichester: Wiley.

Haddock, G. (2013). The challenge of anger. Aggression and violence when delivering CBT for psychosis: Clinical and service
considerations. In C. Steel (Ed.), CBT for Schizophrenia: Evidence-Based Interventions and Future Directions (pp. 109-126). Chichester:
Wiley.

Hafner, H., & van der Heiden, W. (2008). Course and outcome. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 100-
116). Oxford: Guilford Press.


Hagen, R., Turkington, D., Berge, T., & Grawe, R. (2011). CBT for Psychosis: A Symptom-Based Approach. Hove, UK: Routledge.

Harrison, P. (2009). The neurobiology of schizophrenia. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor & Geddes, J. (Eds.), New Oxford Textbook
of Psychiatry (Volume 1, Second Edition, pp. 561-568). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Harvey, P. (2013). Cognitive Impairment in Schizophrenia: Characteristics, Assessment, and Treatment. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Heisel, M. J. (2008). Suicide. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 49 1-506). Oxford: Guilford Press.
Hooley, J. (2007). Expressed emotion and relapse of psychopathology. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 3, 329-352

Hor, K., & Taylor, M. (2010). Suicide and schizophrenia: A systematic review of rates and risk factors. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 24,
81-90.

Hutton, P., & Taylor, P. J. (2014). Cognitive behavioural therapy for psychosis prevention: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Psychological Medicine, 44, 449-468.

Jablensky, A. (2009). Course and outcome of schizophrenia and their prediction. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, & Geddes, J.
(Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry (Volume 1, Second Edition, pp. 568-578). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jackson, H., & McGorry, P. (2009). The Recognition and Management of Early Psychosis: A Preventive Approach (Second Edition). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Jauhar, S., McKenna, P., Radua, J., Fung, E., Salvador, R., & Laws, K. (2014). Cognitive-behavioural therapy for the symptoms of
schizophrenia: Systematic review and meta-analysis with examination of potential bias. The British journal of Psychiatry, 204, 20-29
Javitt, D., Spencer. S., Thaker, G., Winterer, G., & Hajos, M. (2008). Neurophysiological biomarkers for drug development in schizophrenia.
Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery, 7, 1-17

Jobe, T., & Harrow, M. (2010). Schizophrenia course, long-term outcome, recovery, and prognosis. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 19, 220-225.


Kern, R., Glynn, S., Horan, W., & Marder, S. (2009). Psychosocial treatments to promote functional recovery in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35, 347-361.

Keshavan, M., Tandon, R., Boutros, N., & Nasrallah, H. (2008). Schizophrenia, “just the facts": What we know in 2008: Part 3:
Neurobiology. Schizophrenia Research, 106, 89-107.

Kingdon, D., & Turkington, D. (2005). Cognitive Therapy of Schizophrenia. Oxford: Guilford.

Kluwe-Schiavon, B., Sanvicente-Vieira, B., Kristensen, C., & Grassi-Oliveira, R. (2013). Executive functions rehabilitation for
schizophrenia: A critical systematic review. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47,91-104.

Koutra, K., Vgontzas, A., Lionis, C., & Triliva, S. (2014). Family functioning in first-episode psychosis: A systematic review of the
literature. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 49, 1023-1036.

Kraepelin, E. (1899). Psychiatrie (Sixth Edition). Leipzig: Barth.

Kuipers, L., Leff, J., & Lam, D. (2002). Family Work for Schizophrenia (Second Edition). London: Gaskell.

Kurtz, M. (2011). Neurocognition as a predictor of response to evidence-based psychosocial interventions in schizophrenia: What is the
state of the evidence? Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 663-72.

Kurtz, M., & Mueser, K. (2008). A meta-analysis of controlled research on social skills training for schizophrenia. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76, 491-504.

Kutscher, E. (2008). Antipsychotics. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 159-167). Oxford: Guilford
Press.

Lang, F., Késters, M., Lang, S., Becker, T., & Jager, M. (2013). Psychopathological long-term outcome of schizophrenia—A review. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 127, 173-182.

Lenzenweger, M. (2010). Schizotypy and Schizophrenia. Oxford: Guilford.


Leucht, C., Heres, S., Kane, J., Kissling, W., Davis, J, & Leucht, S. (2011). Oral versus depot antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia—A
critical systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised long-term trials. Schizophrenia Research, 127, 83-92.

Lieberman, J., & Murray, R. (2012). Comprehensive Care Of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Lin, C., Lane, H., & Tsai, G. (2012). Glutamate signalling in the pathophysiology and therapy of schizophrenia. Pharmacology,
Biochemistry and Behaviour, 100, 665-77.

Linscott, R., & van Os, J. (2010). Systematic reviews of categorical versus continuum models in psychosis: Evidence for discontinuous
subpopulations underlying a psychometric continuum. implications for DSM-V, DSM-VI, and DSM-VII. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 6, 391-419

Lucksted, A., McFarlane, W., Downing, D., Dixon, L., & Adams, C. (2012). Recent developments in family psychoeducation as an evidence-
based practice. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 38, 101-121

Mahlke, C. 1, Kramer, U.,M., Becker, T., & Bock, T. (2014). Peer support in mental health services. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 27(4), 276-
281.

Mamah, D., & Barch, D. (2011). Diagnosis and classification of the schizophrenia spectrum disorders. In M. Ritsner (Ed.), Handbook of
Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders, Volume I. Conceptual Issues and Neurobiological Advances (pp. 45-83). Oxford: Springer.

Maric, N. P., & Svrakic, D. M. (2012). Why schizophrenia genetics needs epigenetics: A review. Psychiatria Danubina, 24(1), 2-18.
Marsman, A., van den Heuvel, A., Klomp, D., Kahn, R., Luijten, P., & Hulshoff-Pol, H. (2013). Glutamate in schizophrenia: A focused
review and meta-analysis of 1HMRS studies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39, 120-129.

Matheson, S., Shepherd, A., Laurens, K., & Carr, V. (2011). A systematic meta-review grading the evidence for non-genetic risk factors and
putative antecedents of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 133, 133-142.


Matheson, S., Shepherd, A., Pinchbeck, R., Laurens, K., & Carr, V. (2013). Childhood adversity in schizophrenia: A systematic meta-
analysis. Psychological Medicine, 43, 225-238.

McFarlane, W. (2004). Multifamily Groups in the Treatment of Severe Psychiatric Disorders. Oxford: Guilford

McFarlane, W., Lynch, S., & Melton, R. (2012). Family psychoeducation in clinical high risk and first-episode psychosis. Adolescent
Psychiatry, 2, 182-194.

McGlashan, T., & Hoffman, R. (2000). Schizophrenia as a disorder of developmentally reduced synaptic connectivity. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 57, 637-648.

McGorry, P., & Addington, J. (2012). Detection and management of early psychosis. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray (Eds.), Comprehensive
Care of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 51-76). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

McGrath, J., Saha, S., Welham, J., Saadi, O., MacCauley, C., & Chant, D. (2004). A systematic review of the incidence of schizophrenia.
The distribution of rates and the influence of sex, urbanicity, migrant status and methodology. BMC Medicine, 2, 13. doi:10.1186/1741-
7015-2-13

Medalia, A., & Choi, J. (2009). Cognitive remediation in schizophrenia. Neuropsychology Review, 19, 353-364.

Miyamoto, S., Fleischhacker, W., & Lieberman, J. (2012). Pharmacologic treatment of schizophrenia. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray (Eds.),
Comprehensive Care of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 77-138). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mojtabai, R., Nicholson, R., & Carpenter, B. (1998). Role of psychosocial treatments in management of schizophrenia: a meta-analysis
review of controlled outcome studies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24, 569-587.

Morrison, A., Renton, J., Dunn, H., Williams, S., & Bentall, R. (2004). Cognitive Therapy for Psychosis: A Formulation-Based Approach. Hove,
UK: Routledge.

Mueser, K., & Duva, S. (2011). Schizophrenia. In D. Barlow (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Clinical Psychology (pp. 469-503). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


Mueser, K., & Jeste, D. (2008). Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia. Oxford: Guilford Press.

Murray, C., & Lopez, A. (1996). The Global Burden of Disease. A Comprehensive Assessment of Mortality and Disability from Diseases Injuries
and Risk Factors in 1990 and Projected to 2020. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Murray, R., & Castle, D. (2009). Genetic and environmental risk factors for schizophrenia. In M. Gelder, N. Andreasen, J. Lopez-Ibor, &
Geddes, J. (Eds.), New Oxford Textbook of Psychiatry (Volume 1, Second Edition, pp. 553-561). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Murray, R., & Lewis, S. (1987). Is schizophrenia a neurodevelopmental disorder. British Medical Journal, 295, 681-682.

Murray, R., & Van Os, J. (1998). Predictors of outcome in schizophrenia. journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 18, 25-45.

Nelson, M., Seal, M., Pantelis, C., & Phillips, L. (2013). Evidence of a dimensional relationship between schizotypy and schizophrenia: A
systematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Reviews, 37, 317-327.

NICE. (2014). Psychosis and Schizophrenia in Adults: Treatment and Management (Clinical Guideline 178). London: Author.

O'Driscoll, C., Laing, J., & Mason, O. (2014). Cognitive emotion regulation strategies, alexithymia and dissociation in schizophrenia, a
review and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 34, 482-495.

Onwumere, J, Bebbington, P., & Kuipers, E. (2011). Family interventions in early psychosis: Specificity and effectiveness. Epidemiology
and Psychiatric Sciences, 20, 113-119.

Palmer, B., Dawes, S., & Heaton, R. (2009). What do we know about neuropsychological aspects of schizophrenia? Neuropsychology
Review, 19, 365-384.

Pfammatter, M., Junghan, U., & Brenner, H. (2006). Efficacy of psychological therapy in schizophrenia: Conclusions from meta-analyses.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32(Suppl. 1), S64-S80.

Phillips, L., Francey, S., Edwards, J., & McMurray, N. (2007). Stress and psychosis: Towards the development of new models of
investigation. Clinical Psychology Review, 27, 307-317.


Rapp, C., & Goscha, R. (2006). The Strengths Model: Case Management with People with Psychiatric Disabilities (Second Edition). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Rapp, C., & Goscha, R. (2008). Strengths-based case management. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp.
319-328). Oxford: Guilford Press.

Read, J. (2010). Can poverty drive you mad? “Schizophrenia”, socio-economic status and the case for primary prevention. New Zealand
Journal of Psychology, 39, 7-19.

Read, J., & Dillon, J. (2013). Models of Madness (Second Edition). London: Routledge

Rector, N., & Beck, A. (2012). Cognitive behavioural therapy for schizophrenia: An empirical review. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 200, 832-839.

Rietkerk, T., Boks, M., Sommer, L., Liddle, P., Ophoff, R., & Kahn, R. (2008). The genetics of symptom dimensions of schizophrenia: Review
and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 102, 197-205.

Ritsner, M., & Gottesman, I. (2011). The schizophrenia construct after 100 years of challenges. In M. Ritsner (Ed.), Handbook of
Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders, Volume I. Conceptual Issues and Neurobiological Advances (pp. 1-44). Oxford: Springer.

Roberts, D., & Penn, D. (2013). Social Cognition in Schizophrenia: From Evidence to Treatment. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Roe, D., & Davidson, L. (2008). Recovery. In K. Mueser & D, Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 566-574). Oxford: Guilford
Press.

Romme, M., & Escher, S. (1993). Accepting Voices. Shaftesbury: MIND, Blackmore Press.

Romme, M., & Escher, S. (2000). Making Sense of Voices. A Guide for Mental Health Professionals Working with Voice Hearers. Shaftesbury:
MIND, Blackmore Press.

Romme, M., & Escher, S. (2009). Living with Voices. 50 Stories of Recovery. Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

Romme, M., & Escher, S. (Eds.) (2012). Psychosis as a Personal Crisis. London: Routledge.


Rubin, A., Springer, D., & Trawver, K. (2010). Clinician’s Guide to Evidence-Based Practice. Psychosocial Treatment of Schizophrenia.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Ruddle, A., Mason, O., & Wykes, T. (2011). A review of hearing voices groups: Evidence and mechanisms of change. Clinical Psychology
Review, 31(S), 757-766.

Rudnick, A., & Lundberg, E. (2012). The stress-vulnerability model of schizophrenia: A conceptual analysis and selective review. Current
Psychiatry Reviews, 8, 337-341.

Rujescu, D., & Karayiorgou, M. (2012). Genetic factors in the diagnosis and treatment of schizophrenia. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray
(Eds.), Comprehensive Care of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 378-392). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Rund, B. (2014). Does active psychosis cause neurobiological pathology? A critical review of the neurotoxicity hypothesis. Psychological
Medicine, 44, 1577-1590.

Saha, S., Chant, D., Welham, J., & McGrath, J. (2005). A systematic review of the prevalence of schizophrenia. PLoS Medicine, 2, 413-433.

Sajatovic, M., Madhusoodanan, S., & Fuller, M. (2008). Clozapine. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp.
178-185). Oxford: Guilford Press.

Sarin, F., Wallin, L., & Widerlév, B. (2011). Cognitive behaviour therapy for schizophrenia: A meta-analytical review of randomized
controlled trials. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 65(3), 162-174.

Savla, G., Moore, D., & Palmer, B. (2008). Cognitive functioning. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 91-
99). Oxford: Guilford Press.

Schennach-Wolff, R., Seemuller, F., Musil, R., Spellmann, I. Holler, H., & Riedel, M. (2011). Suicidality and the outcome of schizophrenia.
In M. Ritsner (Ed.), Handbook of Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders, Volume II]. Therapeutic Approaches, Comorbidity and Outcome (pp. 365-
382). Oxford: Springer.


Seeman, P. (2011). All roads to schizophrenia lead to dopamine supersensitivity and elevated dopamine D2 receptors. CNS Neuroscience
& Therapeutics, 17, 118-132

Shevlin, M., Houston, J., Dorahy, M., & Adamson, G. (2008). Cumulative traumas and psychosis: An analysis of the national comorbidity
survey and the British psychiatric morbidity survey. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34, 193-199.

Simon, A., Borgwardt, S., Riecher-Réssler, A., Velthorst, E., de Haan, L., & Fusar-Poli, P. (2013). Moving beyond transition outcomes: Meta-
analysis of remission rates in individuals at high clinical risk for psychosis. Psychiatry Research, 209, 266-272.

Sin, J, & Norman, I. (2013). Psychoeducational interventions for family members of people with schizophrenia: A mixed-method
systematic review. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 74, e1145-e1162.

Slade, M. (2009). Personal Recovery and Mental Illness: A Guide for Mental Health Professional. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Stafford, M., Jackson, H., Mayo-Wilson, E., Morrison, A., & Kendall, T. (2013). Early interventions to prevent psychosis: Systematic review
and meta-analysis. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 346, £185.

Steel, C. (2013). CBT for Schizophrenia: Evidence-Based Interventions and Future Directions. Chichester: Wiley.

Stewart, D., & Davis, K (2008). Neuropathology. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 44-54). Oxford:
Guilford Press.

Sullivan, P., Kendler, K., & Neale, M. (2003). Schizophrenia as a complex trait - evidence from a meta-analysis of twin studies. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 60, 1187-1192.

Tai, S, & Turkington, D. (2009). The evolution of cognitive behaviour therapy for schizophrenia: Current practice and recent
developments. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35, 865-873.

Tandon, R., Keshavan, M., & Nasrallah, H. (2008a). Schizophrenia, “just the facts”: What we know in 2008: Part 1: Overview.
Schizophrenia Research, 100, 4-19.


Tandon, R., Keshavan, M., & Nasrallah, H. (2008b). Schizophrenia, “just the facts” what we know in 2008. Part 2. Epidemiology and
aetiology. Schizophrenia Research, 102, 1-18.

Tandon, R., Nasrallah, H., & Keshavan, M. (2009). Schizophrenia, “just the facts” 4. clinical features and conceptualization. Schizophrenia
Research, 122, 1-23

Tandon, R., Nasrallah, H., & Keshavan, M. (2010). Schizophrenia, “just the facts” 5. Treatment and prevention past present and future.
Schizophrenia Research, 110, 1-23

Tarrier, N. (1994). Management and modification of residual positive psychotic symptoms. In M. Birchwood & N. Tarrier (Eds.),
Psychological Management of Schizophrenia (pp. 109-132). Chichester: Wiley.

Tenhula, W., & Bellack, A. S. (2008). Social skills training. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 240-248).
Oxford: Guilford Press.

Tiffin, P., & Welsh, P. (2013). Practitioner review: Schizophrenia spectrum disorders and the at-risk mental state for psychosis in children
and adolescents—Evidence-based management approaches. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54, 1155-1175.

Tomas, P., Fuentes, L., Roder, V., & Ruiz, J. (2010). Cognitive rehabilitation programs in schizophrenia: current status and perspectives
international. Journal of Psychology and Psychological Therapy, 10, 191-204

US-UK Team (1974). The diagnosis and psychopathology of schizophrenia in New York and London. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 1, 80-102
Vahia, I. V., & Cohen, C. I. (2008). Psychopathology. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical Handbook of Schizophrenia (pp. 82-90). Oxford:
Guilford Press.

van Dam, D., van der Ven, E., Velthorst, E., Selten, J, Morgan, C., & de Haan, L. (2012). Childhood bullying and the association with
psychosis in non-clinical and clinical samples: A review and meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 42, 2463-2474.

Van der Gaag, M., Smit, F., Bechdolf, A., French, P., Linszen, D., Yung, A., ... Cuijpers, P. (2013). Preventing a first episode of psychosis:
Meta-analysis of randomized controlled prevention trials of 12 month and longer-term follow-ups. Schizophrenia Research, 149, 56-62.


van Os, J., Murray, R., & First, R. (2012). Course and outcome in schizophrenia. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray (Eds.), Comprehensive Care of
Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 1-16). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Varese, F., Smeets, F., Drukker, M., Lieverse, R., Lataster, T., Viechtbauer, W., ... Bentall, R. (2012). Childhood adversities increase the risk
of psychosis: A meta-analysis of patient-control, prospective- and cross-sectional cohort studies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38, 661-671.
Vassos, E., Pedersen, C. B., Murray, R., Collier, D., & Lewis, C. (2012). Meta-analysis of the association of urbanicity with schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38, 1118-1123.

Volavka, J., Swanson., J., & Citrome, L. (2012). Understanding and managing violence in schizophrenia. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray
(Eds.), Comprehensive Care of Schizophrenia: A Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 262-290). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Walker, E., Kestler, L., & Bollini, A. (2004). Schizophrenia: aetiology and course. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 401-430.

Walker, E., Mittal, V., & Tessner, K. (2008). Stress and the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis in the developmental course of
schizophrenia. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 4, 189-216.

Weinberger, D., & Harrison, P. (2011). Schizophrenia (Third Edition). Oxford, UK: Wiley Blackwell.

World Health Organization (WHO. (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and
Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

Wykes, T., & Drake, R. (2012). Rehabilitative therapies. In J. Lieberman & R. Murray (Eds.), Comprehensive Care of Schizophrenia: A
Textbook of Clinical Management (Second Edition, pp. 182-198). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Wykes, T., Huddy, V., Cellard, C., McGurk, S. & Czobor, P. (2011). A meta-analysis of cognitive remediation for schizophrenia:
Methodology and effect sizes. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 168, 472-485

Wykes, T., & Reeder, C. (2005). Cognitive Remediation Theory for Schizophrenia. Theory and Practice. London: Brunner Routledge.


Zdanowicz, N., Mees, L., Jacques, D., Tordeurs, D., & Reynaert, C. (2014). Assessment and treatment of the risk of psychosis in adolescents
—A review. Psychiatria Danubina, 26, 115-121.

Ziguras, S., & Stuart, G. (2000). A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of mental health case management over 20 years. Psychiatric Services,
$1, 1410-1421.

Zubin, J., & Spring, B. (1977). Vulnerability: A new view of schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86, 103-126.


Chapter 26 Psychological problems of older people
Bob Woods and Carolien Lamers

DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-26
Case study
Mr Bill Jones is 83 and has been referred to the memory clinic by his general practitioner (GP), who reports that Mr Jones complains about
forgetting people’s names, and that he needs reminding by his wife to complete tasks. He gets annoyed with himself when he cannot find
things he is looking for. He goes out much less now, as most of the close friends he used to socialise with have passed away.

On the face of it, perhaps, this is a fairly typical ‘older adult’ referral. Is Mr Jones one of the 5-7% of his age group developing dementia
(Prince et al., 2013)? Will this be confirmed by a neuropsychological assessment? How will Mr Jones adjust to such a diagnosis? Is this what
he suspects is the problem when he presents himself at the Clinic? Will Mrs Jones slip effortlessly into a caregiving role? What will be the
implications for their lives together?

However, a cursory glance at the literature on the psychology of ageing gives pause for thought. Surely, changes in memory and other
cognitive functions are to be expected as one ages. Is it not possible that Mr Jones is simply reacting to ‘normal’ age-related changes?


The key initial question for the clinical psychologist in this case then becomes: how can cognitive changes associated with a dementia be
distinguished from normal ageing? Note that it is change in functioning that is of importance, which leaves the additional quandary of
estimating change when there is no documented baseline level.

Throughout the chapter we will expand this case study to illustrate key points relevant to the practice of clinical psychology with clients
who are older adults.

Cognitive changes and normal ageing

Most studies of cognitive ageing compare groups of younger and older people. They provide cross-sectional information regarding age
differences rather than indicating the nature and extent of changes with age. Longitudinal studies of ageing tend to show much less
extensive decline than cross-sectional studies. Cohort effects, related to the time in history when the person was born, are thought to
account for a large proportion of age differences (Schaie, 2005; Schaie et al., 2005). These may be due to early experiences in education
and nutrition. Stability in cognitive functioning across much of the lifespan appears to be the norm, rather than a decline from age 20. For
example, Deary et al. (2000) assessed a sample of 101 people 66 years after they were assessed at age 11, using the identical intelligence test.
They found that scores increased over this time, but that a person's scores at age 11 and at age 77 were highly correlated.

Groups of older people in longitudinal studies do show changes in cognition (e.g. Cullum et al., 2000), with increased variance reflecting
probable variability in rates of individual change. There is some support from Schaie’s longitudinal studies that ‘crystallised’ abilities (e.g.
verbal ability) show change later than ‘fluid’ abilities (such as spatial ability and numeric ability), although individual patterns of change are
diverse (Schaie, 2005). Salthouse (2000) suggests that an age-related reduction in speed of information processing could be the fundamental
cognitive change with age. Baltes and Baltes (1990) provide a classic model of successful ageing, which can be applied to conceptualising the
way in which many older people maintain good cognitive function, despite changes occurring at a neuro-physiological level. Their selective


optimisation with compensation (SOC) model suggests that older people ageing successfully select their goals carefully, focusing on the
areas of most importance or interest to themselves; optimise goal-relevant means, perhaps by practising more or devoting more time and
energy to a task than previously; and compensate for areas of lost function using substitute means. Thus, in particular domains - chess,
bridge, an Open University degree, musical performance, wisdom - the person may maintain and develop function, despite experiencing
age-related changes. Schaie (2008) comments that in his large-scale longitudinal study assessing five areas of cognitive function, in each
domain a significant proportion of individuals remained stable over a 7-year period even at advanced ages. Furthermore, a small percentage
of individuals actually showed a significant increase in performance levels. Cognitive decline with age is not a uniform or a universal
phenomenon.

In considering why, on average, groups of older people show reduced scores on cognitive tests, there is no doubt that health problems are
the major factor. For example, vascular disease has been shown in a large-scale study of older men to be related to the equivalent of 5 years
of ‘normal’ age change (Elwood et al., 2002). Diabetes and sensory problems have also been shown to be related to cognitive loss (Cukierman
et al., 2005), with both hearing loss and visual impairment reducing performance (Lin et al., 2013; Valentijn et al., 2005). Lifestyle may also
have an influence, with, for example, older people engaging in a generally active lifestyle showing less cognitive decline over a 6-year period
(Newson & Kemp, 2005).

Assessment

Assessment is the first step in any work to be undertaken when an older person is referred. In a crisis or emergency, assessments can be
quick and instantaneous, but will need to be followed up systematically. In order to offer a person any type of intervention, be it individual or
family therapy, memory retraining or counselling, one needs to have some idea about the nature of the needs and issues encountered by the
person and associated support systems. An intervention is likely to be more effective when the person's perception of their difficulties, the


impact these might have on their lives and their family, and their concerns for the future are taken into consideration. Due to the complex
interplay of physical, psychological and social factors in older adulthood, a multidisciplinary assessment will often be required in order to
ensure a holistic and comprehensive understanding of the issues has been derived on which an intervention package can be developed.
Pre-assessment phase

Before commencing any type of formal assessment, rapport must be established with the person. During this stage of contact it is important
to establish the client's perceptions about the referral. The person might not be aware of any difficulties or may feel that the caregivers are
over-concerned and exaggerating the problems. Through careful interviewing one can begin to establish the nature and level of awareness.
The client may be aware of the difficulties but understand them as signs of old age or in the light of other important life events. Often clients
will express some concerns about what might lie ahead if they were to admit to any difficulties. Statements like ‘I was afraid I would be put
away’ may be made. Others will have a clear concern about the nature of their problems, their possible origin, and the treatment that may be
required.

In any event, explaining the nature of the contact and the plan for the next few sessions can be helpful. The client may experience the scope
of involvement and the intentions of professionals on a multidisciplinary team being set out as helpful and reassuring. Professionals may
find explaining the limitations of confidentiality, in terms of risks involving the safety of the client or others, more difficult. The perceived
tisk to the therapeutic relationship can be seen as an obstacle. However, in order to avoid potentially more difficult situations at a later stage,
these limitations to confidentiality need to be pointed out.

Case study continued
Mr and Mrs Jones are initially seen together in the Clinic. Mrs Jones is a lively, talkative woman, some 15 years younger than her husband. Mr
Jones seems hesitant to talk about his difficulties, but his wife quickly fills in the gaps. Mr Jones looks uncomfortable and embarrassed as a


litany of his memory failures is recounted. The history of the memory problems is raised. Mrs Jones says ‘He was never any good with names,’
but it appears that over the last 12 months she has noticed a worsening of the problems.

Did anything else change at that time? Mrs Jones describes how just over a year ago they lost a daughter, who had become progressively
frailer over a 2-year period with cancer. However, although Mr Jones and his daughter were close, she feels it has had little impact on him,
and he never mentions her.

Interviewed alone, it is clear Mr Jones is slightly hard of hearing. He has not considered a hearing aid, as wearing one would be too
embarrassing, he says. When asked about his memory problems, he motions to the chair vacated by his wife: ‘You'll have to ask her about all
that,’ he says. He makes it clear that it is his wife who has initiated the referral. He sounds sad as he talks about the friends he has lost, and
becomes tearful when his daughter is mentioned. He remarks how unfair it is that somebody relatively young should die, whilst he has to go
on living.

Pre-diagnostic counselling

Undertaking pre-assessment and pre-diagnostic counselling has become almost routine in other parts of the health service, for example
in cancer and HIV/AIDS services. The client is informed about the intention behind the assessment and discussions will be held about
the consequences of a likely positive outcome. It is considered to be a person's right to be informed regarding investigations and findings.
However, practice with older people suspected of having cognitive impairment often appears to be different. The assumption may be made
that they are not aware of what is going on and they will not understand or remember the impact of the assessments and diagnosis.
Sometimes the assumption is made that sharing a diagnosis might distress the person, and exacerbate or even trigger an episode of
depression or suicide. Euphemisms (‘failing memory’; ‘forgetfulness’) are used with the person with dementia in place of the actual
diagnostic terms, which are used more often with family caregivers (Downs et al., 2002). The caregivers of the person may express anxiety
about the client being told their diagnosis. However, despite reports of initial shock, distress and anxiety, studies are now indicating that


people with dementia report subsequently being glad they were told the diagnosis (e.g. Lee et al., 2014), although a number of people who
have been told the diagnosis continue to conceptualise their problems in relation to age-related memory loss (e.g. Clare et al., 2006). From
a systematic review, van den Dungen et al. (2014, p. 1603) concluded that ‘the vast majority of individuals without and with cognitive
impairment prefers to be informed about a diagnosis of dementia for reasons pertaining to autonomy.’

The move towards engaging people with cognitive impairment fully in decision making has been encouraged by Kitwood’s person-centred
care approach, which argues that attending to the whole person is essential to enable the person to make the fullest use of his or her abilities
and to remain a social being (Kitwood, 1997).

Pre-diagnostic counselling plays a major role in the assessment process for people with suspected dementia. People, who have an
awareness and insight into their changing faculties, can understandably be anxious and might have a desire to hide, ignore or minimise
any difficulties. When the person presents for an assessment, it is possible that the first symptoms have existed for several months. ‘Early’
diagnosis is often recommended, but it can be difficult for primary care workers to raise concerns that they or a carer might have about the
abilities of a person if the person is not making any overt complaints. Assessment and diagnosis need to be ‘timely’, offered when the client is
prepared to engage at some level with the process (Woods et al., 2003). The person's beliefs that the symptoms are part of old age and growing
older need to be discussed in a sensitive manner, and alternative possibilities raised.

Establishing the person's understanding of the experienced problems and identifying previously adopted coping mechanisms will inform
further action. Clients’ anxieties may be fuelled by previous experiences of people with similar conditions or symptoms. Explanations
about the possible origins of cognitive impairment can begin to guide the person through the maze of assessments. The possibility of a
deteriorating condition like a dementia syndrome should be considered and discussed as openly as possible. To actually use the words that
might constitute a diagnosis should be attempted. It is useful to clarify whether the person has heard the words used before and what they
think the words mean. The public often are not aware that Alzheimer's disease is just one of a number of forms of dementia. Very often it
is the professionals themselves who are uneasy about naming a possible diagnosis. However, it can be a relief to clients when the condition


they have been worried about is openly discussed. The containment of the person's anxiety until the assessment process is completed is the
aim.

Case study continued

Mr Jones does not know what is wrong with him. He feels he lacks energy and cannot be bothered doing things. If he only had the energy
to remember things, he would be much better. He wonders whether this could all be related to old age. When the assessment procedure is
explained to him, he asks whether he might have Alzheimer's. He is slightly worried, as his mother had become rather confused in old age.
He says he is the sort of person who would want to know what is wrong with him.

Assurances can seldom be given at an early stage. An open approach should be adopted, in which it is indicated that clients’ concerns
will be given serious consideration. Professionals should be prepared to accept that after pre-diagnostic counselling clients may decide that
they do not want to continue with the assessment. Another possibility is that the client may not object to the assessment, but not want to
be informed of a possible diagnosis. It is important to clarify whether the client gives consent for other people to be informed. Only under
exceptional circumstances, where the client is a risk to themselves or others, may there be a need to invoke the relevant legislation. (In
England and Wales, this is Mental Health Act and Mental Capacity Act.)

Health assessment

There is a high comorbidity of a range of physical illnesses in later life, which contribute to cognitive problems and mood changes. It is
therefore important to ensure that a comprehensive physical examination is conducted, whether by the GP or by a neurologist, geriatrician
or psychiatrist. Usually a range of blood tests is carried out to exclude common conditions. For example, low iron levels, vitamin deficiencies,
over- or under-active thyroid, and infections can be diagnosed and treated or further investigated if necessary. Other investigations such


as X-rays, EEG, ECG, CT scan or MRI scan may be considered, depending on the clinical presentation, history and findings of neurological
investigations.

Case study continued

Mr Jones's medical history shows that he has had raised blood pressure for many years, for which he receives medication, and that he recently
has developed diabetes, which is controlled through diet. These findings will need to be taken into consideration when a diagnosis is made.
Mood assessment

Case study continued

Mr Jones is asked about his appetite and his sleep. He eats well, but his regular nightmares lead to sleepless nights. He has been reliant
on benzodiazepines to help him sleep for many years. The nightmares have become worse over the last few years, and concern his time in
national service in the army, when he was in action in the Far East. Since the loss of his old friends, who he has known since his days in the
army, he has not been able to talk about his wartime experiences. It is not a topic of discussion favoured by his wife, who tells him ‘it was a
long time ago.’

At this point, the careful neuropsychological assessment, which seemed the most likely response to the initial referral, is put on hold.
The priority is to evaluate Mr Jones's mood and affect, the likelihood of a grief reaction, and the possibility of post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD). If these factors turn out not to be contributory to his presentation, then there are medical factors (hearing loss, hypertension,
diabetes and benzodiazepine use) to consider. On the social front, there appears to be some tension in the relationship between Mr and Mrs
Jones, and a loss of key members from Mr Jones's social network that may well be relevant.


In fact, it is this combination and interaction of biological, social and psychological factors that is the hallmark of multidisciplinary work
with older adults. Formulations need to reflect the multifactorial nature of older adult presentations, and assessment and interventions
need to be based on this premise.

Depression and anxiety in later life

Prevalence

Depression and anxiety are common psychological disorders in late life. Reported prevalence rates vary from study to study, and reflect
differences in criteria and measures as well as between populations. Gould et al. (2012a) suggest that in a community sample 9.4% of older
people can be affected by a major depressive disorder, while 15% present with clinically significant depressive symptoms. Prevalence rates
are higher for people in residential care (42%) and hospital settings (28%). In relation to anxiety, Gould et al. (2012b) report that estimates
range from 3.2% to 14.2%. Generalised anxiety disorder and phobic disorders are the most common forms of anxiety disorder, affecting
7.3% and 7.5% of older people at any time, respectively.

It is important to emphasise that the rates of depressive disorder and anxiety are no greater in older people living in the community than
those of younger age groups, and may in fact be lower (Jorm, 2000). Depression is not the natural state of later life. It is incorrect to assume
that the weight of loss and adversity associated with ageing must inevitably lead to depression. Results of gerontological studies show that
many older people maintain life satisfaction and well-being in the face of losses, stressful life events and difficult life circumstances (e.g.
Windle & Woods, 2004). The key role of personal psychological resources in successful ageing is underlined research findings which show
that individuals with a stronger sense of control, mastery or resilience are better equipped to deal with problems encountered in later life.


Life events

Numerous studies indicate that depression in older adults (as with younger people) is associated with higher rates of stressful life events and
difficulties during the preceding year and of accumulated events and difficulties across the lifespan (Kraaij & de Wilde, 2001; Kraaij et al.,
2002). It is important to note, however, that many older people experience stressful life events without developing depression. Davies (1996)
suggests that, perhaps counter-intuitively, older people experience fewer adverse life events than younger people. However, they also enjoy
fewer desirable events.

Life events, which threaten social roles and social identity, are especially difficult. They reduce the potential for the person to exert control
in areas of life of particular salience and importance. Kuypers and Bengtson (1973) postulate, in their social breakdown theory, that older
people have an ill-defined role in society and that the lack of a positive reference group can potentially decrease their abilities to cope in
a constructive manner. Retirement provides a good example. If work was fundamental to the person's sense of worth and identity, then
it will be more difficult to maintain this sense when retired. For many people, a sense of control is important. If retirement was planned
and anticipated, it is likely to be less problematic than if it was unexpected and involuntary. Many people find retirement a relief from
the demands of work, especially where work was monotonous, physically challenging or damaging to health. The impact of retirement on
finances can be a major issue for retirees, with financial security in late life challenged by changes in policies on pensions.

Bereavement

Compared to younger people, older adults tend to have fewer severe grief reactions. They report lower levels of distress and mental health
problems following a bereavement, although there may be more of an impact on physical health (e.g. Breckenridge et al., 1986; Stroebe et al.,
2007). One factor that may account for older people's less severe grief reactions is that most bereavements experienced by older people are of
other older people, and so are less likely to be perceived as ‘untimely’. However, the death of an adult child remains difficult for older people,


perhaps because this departs from the developmental expectation. When a death is expected, as in a terminal illness, younger people often
benefit more than older adults from a period of anticipatory mourning, and show a less severe grief reaction. The situation appears to be
more complex for older people, who may be exhausted after a prolonged period of caregiving (Oyebode, 2008).

Grief is, of course, a normal process in response to loss. The question arises as to when does grief become ‘abnormal’, or, perhaps, when is
psychological intervention required? There is now acceptance that ‘stage theories’ of grief, which prescribe a particular sequence of tasks for
the grief process, whilst being a useful reminder of the range of emotions and reactions often encountered, do not represent a required way
of coping. There is, in fact, wide variation in normal grieving (Oyebode, 2008; Stroebe et al., 2007). Nor can a specific time period be specified.
Later adjustment difficulties can be predicted by certain indicators a few months after the bereavement. These include negative self-image
and low self-esteem, negative cognitions such as self-blame and guilt, and a continued impact on day-to-day living (Oyebode, 2008)

Case study continued

Mr Jones is asked about the loss of his daughter in more detail. He bursts into tears again and explains how much he misses her and how
special their relationship had been. He finds it hard to discuss his feelings with his wife, afraid of upsetting her as well. He feels he should be
stronger, but has no energy or interest in anything. He feels he cannot focus on anything as his thoughts drift back to images of his daughter
in the final stages of her illness. He blames himself for not doing more to help her previously.

Health and mood

The most common adversities in later life relate to health problems, and severe illness in the past year is one of the life events shown by
Kraaij and de Wilde (2001) to be related to depressive symptoms in later life. Depression and physical health have a complex relationship.
Symptoms of depression (slowness, lethargy, loss of energy, loss of appetite and difficulty in sleeping) may in fact be a manifestation of
physical health difficulties. This is a problem with some self-report depression scales, which include several such somatic items. Also some


clients complain of physical symptoms, when in fact they are depressed. Quite commonly older adult clients may have a combination of
physical health problems and psychological difficulties. Some common health problems in older people (especially Parkinson's disease and
stroke) are known to be associated with depression (Laidlaw et al., 2003), with as many asa fifth of stroke patients being depressed 6 months
post-stroke (Skilbeck, 1996). It is sometimes argued that mood disorders arise directly from the changes associated with stroke or other
physical health problems. However, from a psychological perspective, the person's mood needs to be understood in relation to the dynamics
of the process of their adjustment to physical health problems. Dent et al. (1999) suggest the level of disability is the key factor, rather than
the specific disorder, which mediates the occurrence of depression. The extent to which the person feels control over the health problem (e.g.
a self-limiting versus a life-threatening condition); the extent to which it threatens the person's body image (e.g. a limb amputation); and the
extent to which it interferes with valued roles will affect the person’s psychological reaction to physical health problems. These issues need
to be considered when assessing older adults with depression and physical health problems.
Cognitive impairment and mood
It has long been established that depression and anxiety are themselves associated with cognitive impairments. Difficulties with motivation,
concentration, sustained attention and speed of response are associated with low mood. However, these impairments may persist once
mood has returned to normal levels. Bhalla et al. (2006) found impaired information processing speed, delayed memory and diminished
visuospatial ability in older people who had recovered from depression. Almost all of those who showed cognitive impairments whilst
depressed remained impaired when the depression had remitted. Surprisingly, nearly a quarter of those who were cognitively normal whilst
depressed showed cognitive impairment after recovery.

Vascular disease is associated with cognitive impairment and depression, so called ‘vascular depression’. Alexopoulos (2005) suggests
that vascular disease may contribute to the aetiology of depression in older people by increasing vulnerability, by triggering depressive
symptoms, or by maintaining depressed mood. Vascular disease may be the mechanism underlying mood problems in the group of older


people with depression who show clear evidence of cognitive impairment (falling short of dementia), have abnormal brain scans, and who
have worse outcomes, with respect to both recovery and mortality.

Depression is increasingly being linked with the subsequent development of dementia (Bhalla et al., 2006; Gatz et al., 2005) although
Vinkers et al. (2004) in a longitudinal study suggested that rather than predicting the onset of Alzheimer’s disease, depression is itself an
early indication of the condition.

These considerations emphasise the futility of conducting psychological assessment of cognitive impairment to determine whether an
older adult has depression or dementia. Thus, the question in relation to Mr Jones is how best to understand and offer help with the multiple
cognitive and affective problems he is experiencing, not to make a differential diagnosis between dementia and depression.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Traumatic and difficult events earlier in life have an important influence on older people, just as they do on younger adults (Kraaij & de
Wilde, 2001). Childhood sexual abuse, exposure to traumatic incidents in wartime, rape, involvement in life-threatening accidents and so
on may all have ramifications in later life. As many as 16% of Second World War veterans have been reported as showing symptoms of PTSD
(Bonwick & Morris, 1996). There are even higher rates amongst prisoners of war (POWs), for example, 30% of British Far East POWs (Neal et
al., 1995) and 32% of Australian POWs SO years after the Korean war (Ikin et al., 2010). Much depends on the specific experiences of combat
or imprisonment. Whilst some older people have had the symptoms of PTSD ever since the traumatic event, for others the memories emerge
in later life. In these cases, perhaps the stress has been contained for many years, with the person coping by remaining busy and occupied.
Retirement or ill-health may lead to inactivity, with more time to ruminate or engage in a life review process. Rumination and self-reflection
may trigger PTSD symptoms. Alternatively media coverage of anniversaries of traumatic events may provide graphic reminders of traumatic
events long forgotten, which trigger PTSD. For some, the memories surface through nightmares initially, rather than daytime intrusive
thoughts. Trauma in later life may have more impact on someone who has previously had PTSD (Solomon & Prager, 1992).


Case study continued

While Mr Jones is talking about his daughter, he becomes agitated and states that seeing his daughter reminded him of images from his
national service where he saw people who were dying and emaciated. He goes quiet and when asked whether he thinks about his past
experience, he remarks that images appear and that there is not much he can do about keeping them away.

Psychological therapy in later life

In all clinical psychological practice, whatever the age of the person, interventions should be based on careful assessment and formulation
and individually tailored to meet clients’ needs. We acknowledge that there is a tension between this position and the drive towards
therapies delivered in a standardised fashion, targeted at particular problems or groups of problems. Evaluations of such therapies, usually
involving a randomised controlled trial design, form the core of the evidence base for the effectiveness of psychological therapies. Such
studies are useful and helpful as a guide to the type of interventions that may be effective with a particular person. However, in the clinical
context, the question is not what is effective for a group of patients in a research trial, but rather what will make the desired difference for the
specific client (Woods, 2003)

Most psychological therapeutic work undertaken with older people is little different from that undertaken with younger people. There
are a handful of intervention approaches that are often described as being specific to older people, but essentially these are approaches to
working with people with dementia, whatever the age of the person. The major group of approaches that might be said to be specifically
geared to the developmental position of the older person are reminiscence and life review. These may readily be linked to the final phase
of Erikson’s lifespan developmental model (Erikson, 1963; Erikson et al., 1986), where the task of late life is seen as involving a process
of life review. The successful resolution of this stage involves a sense of integrity. This involves accepting both what has been achieved
and what will never now be possible. It also involves balancing disappointments and regrets with successes and positive experiences


and memories. This position is contrasted with a sense of despair. Despair arises from seeing one's life as wasted. It is associated with
regret, disappointment, and a sense of shame at the person one has become. Erikson also postulated that earlier life stages might become
reactivated by changes in old age. For example, a loss of mobility or role could challenge established ego strengths of autonomy or
competence.

Although often used with people with dementia, typically in groups, primarily as a means of encouraging communication, enjoyment
and well-being (Gibson, 2004), life review and reminiscence therapy have also been widely used with older people experiencing symptoms
of depression. Bohlmeijer et al. (2003) report a meta-analysis indicating strong empirical support for its use in this context. Life review
is usually undertaken on a one-to-one basis, involving the person working through their life story chronologically, with the emphasis on
evaluation of events and experiences, positive and negative, rather than simply the enjoyable recall of memories (Haight, 1992).

Some issues arise more commonly in psychological therapy with older people. These include coping with adversity, cognitive impairment,
emotional and behavioural problems, health problems, ambivalence about therapy, dependency and family relationship issues. No issues
are, in fact, age-specific. The interventions used to address these problems with older adults may be considered as specific adaptations of
more general psychological interventions used with people at other stages of the lifecycle (Woods & Charlesworth, 2002).

Adversity

Older people referred for psychological therapy are often in the midst of difficult life circumstances - health problems, multiple
bereavements, reduced social networks, enforced relocations. They may also face financial constraints and experience ageism. When clients
report negative thoughts these cannot always be conceptualised as cognitive distortions. They may well reflect the reality of the person's
existence. A wise therapist does not rush in with bland reassurance or quick-fix solutions offering false hopes in such circumstances.
Helping clients reflect on and reconsider the meanings underlying the negative thoughts is one approach used by therapists working in the
field of life-threatening illness (e.g. Moorey, 1997) that is applicable to working with older people. Helping clients develop pragmatic coping


strategies is another approach - either problem-solving strategies to change an aspect of the difficult situation, or emotion-focused, to assist
in managing emotional responses to challenging situations. Here, insights and techniques from mindfulness-based approaches (Smith,
2004) and acceptance and commitment therapy (Wetherell et al., 2011) may be helpful.

Cognitive impairment

As well as those older people experiencing dementia, people whose cognitive ability has been affected by a stroke, Parkinson's disease, or who
have mild cognitive impairment, as well as those whose depressed mood is associated with cognitive impairment, may avail themselves of
psychological therapy. Such cognitive impairments do not rule out the use of therapies such as CBT - which have been shown to be feasible
for treating depressed mood and anxiety in people with dementia (Orgeta et al., 2014; Scholey & Woods, 2003). However, the therapist
needs to adopt a flexible approach, using repetition and memory aids; summarising clearly and making the linking statements more explicit
and step-by-step; working at the client's own pace; and where appropriate using behavioural methods, rather than focusing primarily on
cognitions. Homework set as part of therapy can be challenging and needs to be adapted to the cognitive abilities of the person. Assistance
from others to remind and help with the implementation of behavioural methods can facilitate progress. It is always helpful to check the
person’s literacy skills before asking them to complete written homework. Literacy skills deficits should be considered when clients do
not complete written homework. Sometimes changes in handwriting can also impede on the person’s willingness to write or acknowledge
difficulties with written tasks.

Physical health status

Clients’ health may place limitations on the progress of therapy, and may be a focus for their concerns. Sensory and mobility problems may
require therapy procedures to be adapted to be accessible to clients. For example, written materials may not be appropriate for those with
visual impairment, and home visits may be required for those with limited mobility. Depression and physical health problems can interact


to reduce clients’ functioning further, leading to increased disability, the reduction of which may be an important therapeutic goal. Working
closely with medical colleagues who can advise on the effects of the person's health (and the associated medication) on adaptive functioning
is essential.

Anti-therapy beliefs

Each succeeding generation of older people is more familiar with what is involved in psychological therapy. However, as with all cohorts,
large individual differences remain in preparedness to engage in ‘talking therapy’. For some, where physical problems have already been
diagnosed, seeing a clinical psychologist implies that their problems are ‘all in the mind’, and may appear to challenge the physical reality
of their symptoms. Working with clients to move away from dichotomous thinking about ‘body’ and ‘mind’ is helpful here. Clients may be
helped to recognise that physical symptoms, including pain, can be worsened by stress and tension. It may be explained that the role of
psychological therapy is to help clients manage a range of life challenges including physical symptoms, and to increase quality of life as far
as possible.

Dependency upon others

The dependency relationships of older people are often to the fore in psychological therapy. It is not possible to maintain the illusion
sometimes fostered by the process of individual therapy with younger adults that the person exists in isolation from a dynamic system of
significant relationships. An understanding of relationships with the client's spouse, adult children, care providers, medical practitioners
and other involved health and social care professionals is crucial to working with older adults. Power imbalances loom large, and problems
may emerge when the client's attempts to maintain some control in relationships are deemed inappropriate by those with more power. An
interpersonal emphasis to therapy is often needed, with consideration given to joint sessions and the use of systemic therapy approaches
and formulations (Pearce, 2002). The dependency of the person on the therapist may become an important issue. The therapist may be


viewed as a friend, and the client may feel bereft when treatment comes to an end. Issues of closure and consideration of the client's broader
support system need careful reflection in supervision for experienced therapists as well as novices.

Chronicity of problems

Some older people referred for psychological therapy may have been experiencing difficulties over many years. They may have adapted to
their problems in some ways, with them becoming part of their lives. They may have had many previous experiences of treatments of
various kinds. Being clear regarding the goals of treatment is important in such cases. Improving quality of life and the person's ability
to cope may be acceptable goals. The person's past efforts to cope with problems over many years may be used to generate strategies for
addressing their current situation.

The evidence base for psychological therapies for emotional disorders in older people is not large. Older people are often excluded from
treatment studies on the basis of their age. There is, however, some evidence from randomised controlled trials that CBT in group and
individual formats is effective in treating anxiety disorders in older people (e.g. (Barrowclough et al., 2001). Cognitive therapy, behaviour
therapy and brief psychodynamic psychotherapy appear to be equally effective treatment modalities for depression in older people
(Thompson et al., 1987), with the effect size for cognitive therapy being comparable to that in younger adults (Woods & Roth, 2005). A
combined approach, using medication and monthly sessions of interpersonal psychotherapy, has been shown to be particularly helpful in
preventing relapse for older adults (Reynolds et al., 1999).

Case study continued
The initial formulation regarding Mr Jones's mood is that he is experiencing intrusive thoughts and images relating to both his daughter and
his army experiences, and that his lack of opportunity to discuss these is hindering his ability to process and cope with these experiences. He


is seen for a series of 10 individual sessions where he is given the opportunity to talk about his life experiences and his losses and begin to
integrate them as far as possible through structured life review using cognitive strategies, to help him reconsider his self-blame.

Mr Jones reports that he is beginning to be calmer about his daughter's death and now talks about her without crying. He is able to
recall her as she was before the illness and recount stories about her when she was a younger girl. The flashbacks from his army time have
decreased in frequency and are generally less distressing. His improved mood is confirmed by his wife, and a reduction in scores on the
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS; Kenn et al., 1987) from the clinical to the normal range is also encouraging.

At a follow-up session 4 weeks later, to review the progress made during therapy, both Mr and Mrs Jones report maintained mood
improvements, but the memory problems are still evident. It is decided to investigate these concerns further.

Dementia assessment

As one gains more experience in working with people with cognitive impairment, informal clinical interviews and bedside interviews can
make valuable contributions to the cognitive assessment. Home visits also facilitate easy conversations, where clients can be asked about
people in photos, names of pets and flowers in the garden. The offer of a cup of tea can often reveal a range of competencies, or lack of them:
remembering what the visitor would like to drink, locating and recognising relevant items in kitchen cupboards, sequencing the actions, and
delivering the ‘order’. In spontaneous conversation, naming and word-finding difficulties may be apparent. Memory lapses, repetitions and
confusing and illogical accounts can alert the professional to possible areas of difficulty which may benefit from further assessment.
Cognitive assessment

In undertaking a cognitive assessment, the priority is to establish rapport with the person. Clients will perform at their best if they feel
supported and reassured. It is well worth investing time to try to allay any worries and anxieties they might have. Checking hearing aids are


in place with a working battery and the availability of (reading) glasses are also helpful.

Establishing whether the person is literate is important, to avoid distress during assessments that assume basic reading and writing skills.
The possibility of (undiagnosed) dyslexia needs to be kept in mind. Ascertaining the person’s first language can help if the assessment is
standardised on an English-speaking population. Some estimators of premorbid intelligence such as the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading
(WTAR; Wechsler, 1999) or the Test of Premorbid Functioning (TOPF; Wechsler, 2011) may be unsuitable for this reason. The clinician must
ensure that the assessment chosen has appropriate age norms and is validated for the cultural group one is working with.

It is advisable, where possible, to write down complete answers given to test items. This helps the examiner concentrate on the person and
reduces the possibility of incorrect recording or scoring. The other advantage is that when interpreting the results, the quality of the answer
and of any errors made can be illuminating. For example, if a task cannot be completed because of the person's difficulties in understanding
the instructions, the interpretation may be different from where the person has difficulties concentrating.

In order to form a quick impression about the person's level of cognitive functioning, a range of short screening assessments are available.
Recommended cut-off points and score ranges on such tests should be treated with caution, as they are influenced by education, mood and
health, and the same summary score may be achieved by people showing quite different profiles of performance on items and subtests. Very
brief screening tools such as the 6CIT (Brooke & Bullock, 1999) may be useful in some circumstances, but should be followed up with more
detailed assessment. Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (Hsieh et al., 2013), the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA; Nasreddine et al.,
2005) and the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS; Randolph, 1998) are more useful in providing
a profile of older adults functioning across different areas of cognition. All need to be interpreted in light of the best information regarding
the person’s premorbid intellectual and educational level, whether predicted from the WTAR, the TOPF or from the person’s occupation and
education (Crawford et al., 1989). The same profile of scores would have a completely different interpretation for a retired headmaster as
compared with a person whose predicted lifelong intellectual level was in the below-average range.


Often the results from one of the aforementioned measures will provide enough information to contribute to a diagnosis, but if the
findings are more ambiguous with more specific deficits, further assessment is usually indicated. A large and growing range of measures is
available. Examples are given in Table 26.1 for each key area of cognitive function. Further assessment should be hypothesis-driven, with
assessments chosen to evaluate the emerging model of the person's strengths and weaknesses.

Case study continued

Based on his occupational history as a tax inspector and supported by his performance on the TOPF, Mr Jones's premorbid Intelligent
Quotient (IQ) is estimated to be above the average (predicted IQ 118). His current IQ is just under average as estimated using the Wechsler
Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) (full scale IQ 96). On a memory assessment, he shows difficulties in immediate and delayed recall of
verbal information. His visual memory is somewhat better, although also impaired. It was also noted that Mr Jones was having perceptual
problems as confirmed by the Visual Object and Space Perception Battery (VOSP).

Collateral history

As a person with memory problems or limited insight might have difficulty recounting the onset and development of cognitive impairment
symptoms, it is of great benefit to interview a person who knows the client well. They can hopefully give a clearer account of the onset and
nature of the changes that have taken place. Any particular concerns that they might have or risks they might perceive can be taken into
account in the diagnostic process and will inform the nature of any possible intervention. This assessment can take the form of a structured
instrument such as the IQ-CODE (Jorm et al., 1989). If the client still drives a car or has other responsibilities such as caring for a dependent
or working, the views of the informant will be important to inform whether other actions might need to be taken, to limit the responsibilities
of the client and so manage related risks.


Table 26.1 Examples of measures available to assess different areas of cognitive function (most are available from Pearson
Assessment or Psychological Corporation)
Area to be assessed Examples of available measures
Premorbid intellectual level NART, WTAR and TOPF
Screening of cognitive function 6-CIT, ACE III, MoCA
Profile of cognitive function MEAMS, CAMCOG-R, RBANS
Current intellectual function WASI-II, WAIS-IV
Memory Doors & People, Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test, Camden Memory Tests, Wechsler Memory
Scale IV
Perceptual function Visual Object & Space Perception Battery (VOSP)
Executive function Behavioural Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome, Hayling & Brixton, Delis-Kaplan Executive
Function System (DKEFS) includes Verbal Fluency - FAS & Trail-making Test;
Attention Test of Everyday Attention (TEA)
Language Vocabulary from WASI-II, Graded Naming Test
Constructional abilities Block Design from WASI-II
Diagnostic process
Making the diagnosis of a dementia syndrome has become more important since the development of medication which may slow down


cognitive decline. This has led many people in the very early stages of dementia to seek assessment than was previously the case. Due to
the complexity of dementia assessment and the range of variables that can have an impact on cognitive functioning, a multidisciplinary
approach is essential. Findings should be interpreted in light of one of the two major diagnostic frameworks for mental health problems:
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fifth Edition (DSM-5; APA, 2013) or the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Edition (ICD- 10;
WHO, 1992). Table 26.2 lists the major types of cognitive impairment seen in older people and their main features.

In general, the criteria for a dementia syndrome include the presence of the symptoms for more than 6 months, that they should not be
explainable by any other physical cause and that the complaints should have an impact on day-to-day living. A change in additional cognitive
domains, such as memory problems, disorientation, problems in executive functioning (problem solving, logical and abstract thinking),
apraxia (difficulty carrying out certain actions), aphasia (difficulty with expressive and/or receptive communication) or agnosia (perceptual
problems) should have been established through cognitive assessments. Changes in personality can be noticed, either a complete change or
an accentuation of previous characteristics. Having diagnosed a dementia syndrome, the differential diagnosis of dementia subtype will be
made on additional clinical features and a variety of classification systems are available for these (e.g. for Lewy body dementia or fronto-
temporal dementia). Making a specific diagnosis has utility where treatment or management may be influenced; for example, the presence
of Lewy body dementia is a strong contra-indication for the use of antipsychotic medication. However, it is important to remember that
post-mortem studies (where the neuropathology can be confirmed) of older people with dementia indicate that most patients have mixed
pathologies, with Alzheimer’s and vascular changes present (Xuereb et al., 2000). In addition, the evidence is now accumulating in support
of Kitwood’s (1990) proposition that the manifestations of dementia are only attributable in part to neuropathological changes.

In older people, the link between clinical picture and pathology appears less clear than has conventionally been claimed. Snowdon (2003)
commenting on the Nun Study, a longitudinal study of a population of older nuns, who have all agreed to regular examinations and to
an eventual post-mortem, describes a sister who died at the age of 85 without apparent cognitive impairment on testing, but whose brain
showed large amounts of Alzheimer-type pathology. He concluded: ‘Given nearly the same location, type and amount of neuropathologic


lesions, participants in our study show an incredible range of clinical manifestations, from no symptoms to severe symptoms’ (Snowdon,
2003, pp. 453).
Epidemiology of dementia
In a systematic review and meta-analysis of the global literature on the prevalence of dementia covering the period 1980-2009, Prince et al.
(2013) found that the age-standardised prevalence for those aged 2 60 years was 5-7% in most world regions. They also found that there was
ahigher prevalence in Latin America (8.5%), and a distinctively lower prevalence in the four sub-Saharan African regions (2-4%). Prevalence
rates of dementia increase from 1-2% at age 65 to 30% at age 85 (APA, 2013). Prince et al. (2013) estimated that in 2010, 35.6 million people
worldwide lived with dementia, and that the number of people with dementia is expected to almost double every 20 years, to 65.7 million in
2030 and 115.4 million in 2050.
Table 26.2 Major types of cognitive impairment seen in older people and their main features
Name of disorder Clinical features
Age-associated memory impairment (AAMI), Mild A variety of terms have been used to describe states somewhere between
cognitive impairment (MCI), Mild neurocognitive ‘normality’ and ‘dementia’, e.g. minimal dementia, age-associated memory
disorder (NCD), etc. impairment (AAMI), age-associated cognitive decline (AACD) (Cullum et al.
2000), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (Tuokko & Zarit, 2003), and mild
neurocognitive disorder (APA, 2013). For MCI, typically the person does
not meet criteria for dementia, either day-to-day function is not affected,
cesssenetnsetnnetnsetnetinsetnseintetnstinstinttinstinstinstinsesseesssesnees OL Only memory is impaired. Usually there is subjective complaint plus.


some deficits on objective testing. A proportion go on to fulfil diagnostic
criteria for a dementia, but many do not. For mild NCD, there is ‘modest’
impairment in one or more cognitive domains, but it does not affect
capacity for independence in everyday activities.

Alzheimer’s disease This the most common form of dementia at all ages, characterised by loss
of neurons, reflected in neuropathological changes - neurofibrillary tangles
and amyloid plaques. The progression is insidious and gradual. Severe
episodic memory and mild problems with executive function, including
verbal fluency usually appear first. Other symptoms like aphasia, agnosia
and apraxia may develop. A number of medications, said to slow the
progression of the disorder, are licensed.

Lewy body dementia Lewy bodies are neuropathological changes reported in Parkinson's disease
in the basal ganglia. In Lewy body dementia they occur in cortical areas.
Clinical features include hallucinations (visual or auditory), fluctuating
cognition and Parkinsonian symptoms. Neuroleptic medication (major
tranquillisers) should be avoided, despite the presence of hallucinations, as
they may lead to a rapid, irreversible deterioration.

Vascular or multi-infarct dementia This is associated with mini-strokes or other vascular disease of the brain.
The onset is usually more sudden and progression may be stepwise. It
is associated with other cardiovascular conditions (e.g. hypertension,
angina) or diabetes. Cognitive problems tend to be more specific due to the
more localised nature of this type of dementia, e.g. language problems or

seveeseeetteseeteseetestetneeetnesettnetttieseetnerttisstetnerttisstitnerstieeee oi SuOspatial difficulty, Infarcts may be seen on brain scan (CT or MRI), but


are not always evident. Treatment involves managing the risk factors for
further vascular events. About 20% of older people with dementia have
vascular dementia, but there are also many mixed cases of Alzheimer’s and
vascular combined.

Fronto-temporal dementia The main presentation in a fronto-temporal dementia is a change in
personality and social behaviour. The person may become more extraverted
and impulsive, have difficulty maintaining social graces and obeying
social etiquette; or may present as depressed, with lack of initiative and
unwillingness to change routines. Quite often memory is relatively well
preserved and only deteriorates later in the illness. The management of the
behavioural problems arising from this condition can be difficult in terms
of risks and caregivers’ stress.

Pick's disease A dementia affecting primarily the frontal lobes. The onset is usually
between ages 50-60 and women are affected twice as often as men. It isa
specific form of fronto-temporal dementia, with the changes focusing on
personality and behaviour rather than memory.

Huntingdon’s disease This is a rare genetic condition due to an autosomal gene. Genetic testing
will confirm a differential diagnosis. The onset of this condition is often in
the late thirties or early forties. People with Huntingdon’s disease may have
presented with unresponsive mental health conditions, such as depression
or schizophrenia. The most salient clinical sign is the choreoform, jerky
movements. There are associated changes in gait and dysarthria (slurred
speech). Memory is less affected and insight is usually maintained which
can lead to episodes of depression.


Normal pressure hydrocephalus A triad of symptoms alert to the need to consider this condition:
progressive memory impairment and confusion, marked unsteadiness
of gait (ataxia), and urinary incontinence. The problem is caused by
insufficient drainage of the cerebral fluid from the ventricles. This can be
surgically ameliorated by the placement of a shunt (a valve). A CT scan can
be used to ascertain a differential diagnosis.

Semantic dementia Sometimes this condition is described as a temporal lobe variant of fronto-
temporal dementia. Unusual initial presentation is typified by the presence
of a specific difficulty in general knowledge, and an associated naming
difficulty. Personality and behaviour remain intact.

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease This includes the human variant of BSE (mad cow disease). It is caused by
a transmissible agent. The onset tends to be young, the deterioration rapid.
The main presenting problems are neurological in nature, with ataxia,
spasticity and extrapyramidal signs.

Parkinson's disease Some patients diagnosed as suffering from Parkinson's disease will develop
memory problems and a general slowing of their information processing
skills. The organic changes associated with Parkinson's disease take place in
the subcortical structures of the brain, rather than the cortical structures.
(See also Lewy body dementia.)

Sharing the diagnosis
Based on the outcome of pre-diagnostic counselling, the client and their representative can be invited for a meeting in which the findings


of the assessment and the diagnosis are shared. It has to be acknowledged that this meeting might not be easy either for the client or the
professionals involved. It is worth considering conducting a meeting like this with a colleague, ideally somebody who was involved in the
assessment process and is known to the client.

Careful orientation as to the reason for the meeting should take place. Summarising the assessments to date, without asking questions
that can be experienced as another ‘test’, can help to bring a focus to the meeting. Introducing the possibilities for the outcome of the
assessment should take place and it important to reconfirm that the person wishes to be informed about their diagnosis. Questions should
be encouraged, and a check should be made with the client that the conversation is being understood. Psychologist should self-monitor their
speech so as to avoid jargon and complicated descriptions. Visual information may be presented in order to provide evidence, for example a
cognitive profile or brain scan. Throughout the session client’s verbal and non-verbal responses should be monitored to gauge the impact of
the diagnosis. Checking whether a diagnosis has come as a surprise is useful. Clients may be asked what their expectations were. Providing
adequate space and time for clients to assimilate and process the diagnostic information is important during this session, as this meeting
should be considered the first step on the path of intervention. If these first steps are carried out in a supportive manner, this will set the
collaborative and supportive tone for future work.

Case study continued

Mr Jones is invited for a session to share the diagnosis. He decides that his wife can be present as well. The findings of all the investigations
are explained and Mr Jones is given the opportunity to ask questions. He is told that the most likely diagnosis is one of vascular dementia.
He has heard of Alzheimer’s disease, but is not familiar with this new term. The difference is explained and ways in which he can prevent
further deterioration outlined (i.e. keeping his sugar levels and blood pressure under control as well as maintaining a healthy lifestyle). He
is already receiving aspirin as a preventative measure against strokes. Mr Jones feels relieved that there is an explanation for some of his
difficulties. He asks what might happen to him now. It is explained that although it is difficult to give an accurate prognosis, it is likely


that his level of functioning would be stable for some time, before another deterioration might occur. He feels this provides a window of
opportunity for him and his wife to do some things they have been wanting to do.
Psychological interventions in dementia
Specific ‘therapies’ for people with dementia need to be implemented within a framework of values and principles that upholds the
individuality of the person with dementia; offers choice, dignity and respect; and recognises the human value and personhood of the person
with dementia. All of these aspects of care are too easily lost in caregiving systems (including the family), where the person with dementia
may be devalued and depersonalised (Kitwood, 1997; Woods, 1999a, 2001). Within this framework, five major areas of focus for therapeutic
endeavours may be identified (Woods & Clare, 2008). Interventions may focus on cognition, emotion, behaviour, stimulation and carers.
Cognition-focused interventions
Attempts to improve cognitive function in people with dementia have a long history. Reality orientation was an early attempt to combat
the therapeutic nihilism that prevailed in relation to dementia (Holden & Woods, 1995). With reality orientation, clients are repeatedly
presented with orientation information about time, place, people, activities and schedules to help them maintain an accurate understanding
of their moment-to-moment situation. This approach has now been developed into a cognitive stimulation programme, usually delivered
in a group context, with improvements noted in both cognition and quality of life (Aguirre et al., 2013; Spector et al., 2003). With this
approach, clients are helped through regular structured multisensory group exercises, and through reminiscence exercises, matched to their
level of cognitive functioning, to develop strategies for managing memory and other cognitive deficits.

Cognitive rehabilitation is an individually tailored, assessment- and formulation-driven approach (Clare, 2002). Cognitive rehabilitation
identifies treatment goals relevant to the individual, and aims to use the person’s strengths - their relatively preserved abilities - to achieve


these goals. The techniques might include the use of strategies to enhance learning (such as spaced retrieval and errorless learning), the
use of external memory aids to reduce reliance on memory, and the use of anxiety reduction techniques where anxiety forms an obstacle
to the person achieving his/her goals. There is evidence that this approach leads to improved goal performance for people with early-stage
dementia (e.g. Clare et al., 2010), and there is clearly a great deal of potential for assisting people in the early stages of dementia to maintain
control and function in important and relevant areas of their lives.

Case study continued

Mr Jones is keen to learn the names of the people he has met at the local club for people with dementia that he has begun to attend. Based
on his cognitive profile as assessed, cognitive rehabilitation strategies are developed with him. He learns to associate faces with particular
characteristics that he can then associate with the person's name. After 3 weeks of daily practice, he is able to recall three of the four people
in the group.

Emotion-focused interventions

CBT may be used to alleviate depression in dementia, as has been mentioned previously. Caregivers may also be helped to use behavioural
procedures (e.g. increasing involvement in enjoyed activities) to reduce depression in dementia (Teri et al., 1997). Progressive muscle
relaxation has also been used successfully for anxiety symptoms in dementia (Suhr et al., 1999).

Psychotherapeutic interventions with individuals or in a group therapy setting have been developed for people with dementia (Cheston
et al., 2003; Offord et al., 2006; Yale, 1995). In psychotherapy clients have an opportunity to explore the impact of their diagnosis and
cognitive impairment on their well-being. Group therapy for people with dementia is a great resource for those who might otherwise become
withdrawn and feel isolated as they do not know other people in a similar situation to themselves. Group therapy for people with dementia
also provide forum for facilitating self-help and mutual support among group members (Offord et al., 2006)


Reminiscence therapy has been used extensively with people with dementia in both individual and group therapy formats. Reminiscence
therapy involves the discussion of past activities, events and experiences. Aids such as audio and video recordings, pictures, archives, life
story books, and outings to memorable places may be used to facilitate this process. The evidence for the effectiveness of reminiscence
therapy is stronger for its use in individual life story work (rather than group therapy), where it has been shown to lead to improvements in
quality of life and well-being (Subramaniam & Woods, 2012; Subramaniam et al., 2013; Woods et al., 2012).

Validation therapy aims to help people with dementia communicate their feelings (Feil, 1993). With validation therapy, the psychologist
uses active listening, empathy and elaboration skills so as to go beyond the actual words spoken by clients and explore the underlying
meanings of what they say. This facilitative stance is quite different to the responses of many others in the networks of people with dementia
who may frequently correct errors arising from their cognitive impairment, rather than attempting to understand the underlying meaning
of their speech. Resolution therapy has similar aims, emphasising the importance of skilled listening (Stokes & Goudie, 1990).
Behaviour-focused interventions
Behavioural approaches include prompting, breaking tasks down into manageable chunks and social reinforcement. These have been used
to assist in improving and maintaining function in people with dementia (Woods, 1999b). Self-care, dressing, toileting and orientation have
been amongst the areas targeted (McGilton et al., 2003).

Understanding and reducing behaviour that proves to be challenging to others has also been a concern (Division of Clinical Psychology,
2013). Behaviours that challenge have included aggression, lack of cooperation in personal care tasks, inappropriate urination, sexually
disinhibited behaviour and entering other people’s rooms. Generally, approaches that have not been individually tailored have had limited
success (Allen-Burge et al., 1999). The need for careful assessment, functional analysis and individually tailored programmes has been
demonstrated in several single-case series (Moniz-Cook et al., 2001, 2003; Woods & Bird, 1999).


Stimulation and activity approaches

Stimulation and activity approaches include a wide range of interventions such as music and art programmes (e.g. MacPherson et al., 2009;
Sung & Chang, 2005). These programmes are becoming very popular and have positive effects not just on well-being, but also on specific
problems. For example, there is some evidence that preferred music may reduce agitation in people with dementia.

For people with dementia where communication is severely limited and impaired, the primary senses (seeing, hearing, smelling, feeling
and tasting) may be stimulated using multisensory resources, for example a ‘snoezelen room’ or controlled multisensory environment. The
snoezelen room is designed to deliver stimuli to various senses using lighting effects, colour, sounds, music, scents and so forth. The term
snoezelen is a neologism formed from a blend of the Dutch snuffelen (to explore) and doezelen (to doze). The concept was developed by Jan
Hulsegge and Ad Verheul at De Hartenberg Institute in the Netherlands. This approach originally was used with people with intellectual
disabilities, but is now also being used with people with dementia, although evidence for its effectiveness is limited (Chung & Lai, 2002; van
Weert et al., 2005).

Carers’ interventions

Family caregiving has been the focus of extensive research (Zarit & Edwards, 2008). A distinction has been drawn between ‘objective’ and
‘subjective’ burden. Two caregivers, looking after people with similar difficulties, could have potentially quite different outcomes in terms of
perceived strain, impact on their own health and depression. These differences are thought to be related to differences between caregivers
in personality, coping skills, attributional styles, available resources, including social support and help from services, and aspects of the
relationship - past and present - between caregiver and care-recipient. Much of the literature focuses on strain and burden associated with
caregiving. In contrast, Nolan et al. (1996) have been amongst those drawing attention to the satisfactions and rewards that may also be


associated with caregiving. Many caregivers find meaning and purpose in their role, and feel closer to the care-recipient than previously,
despite the many losses that are reported.

Several different psychological interventions involving carers may be considered in clinical practice (Woods & Roth, 2005):

+ Using behavioural techniques to modify the behaviour of the person with dementia, and so reduce the stress experienced by the caregiver.

+ Teaching stress reduction approaches such as relaxation, assertiveness, anger and anxiety management, to directly tackle the caregiver's
feelings of stress.

+ Providing an educational context, where carers’ perceptions and attributions about the situation are challenged, and problem-solving
skills developed.

+ Mobilising family resources, and enhancing social support and networks.

+ Identifying and making use of possible sources of help.

Often carer-focused interventions are provided in group settings, with a mix of these components included. The effectiveness research
has been reviewed by Pusey and Richards (2001) and Brodaty et al. (2003). Although the evidence is mixed, some interventions (e.g. family
counselling) have been successful in both reducing caregiver distress and delaying the point of entry of the person with dementia to
institutional care (Mittelman et al., 1995). There is also optimism that depression and anxiety in caregivers will respond to psychological
therapy. Livingston et al. (2013) showed that an individual eight-session coping strategy programme for carers of people with dementia
delivered by psychology graduates and supervised by clinical psychologists led to a reduction in carers’ depression and anxiety symptoms.
Gallagher-Thompson and Steffen (1994) showed that CBT and brief psychotherapy were equally effective in reducing depression in family
caregivers of people with dementia. However, psychotherapy was more effective with caregivers early in the process of adjustment. In
contrast CBT was more effective with caregivers who had been providing care for 3 and half years or more. This suggests that support in


the emotional adjustment required by the life-changing experience of becoming a caregiver of a person with dementia may be an important
target for intervention.

Other support can be provided through the provision of services, such as day care, home-helps and respite in the home or ina care setting.
Vernooij-Dassen et al. (1995) found that caregivers’ sense of competence improved and admission into a care setting could be delayed, by
providing 4 hours per week of specially trained home-helps.

Case study continued

Mrs Jones appears to be hit harder by the diagnosis than her husband. She explains that she feels she has lost her anchor and is anxious about
the responsibilities she now carries for things her husband always did previously. Mrs Jones is seen for eight sessions to help her come to
terms with her changed role and the grieving process that has started. She finds some behaviours of her husband particularly difficult to deal
with and detailed discussion with her explores the underlying distress. Once she has been able to acknowledge her feelings, she begins to be
able to try out some of the alternative approaches that were suggested. She begins to attend a carers’ support group regularly.
Challenging behaviour

Case study continued

At a routine follow-up appointment, Mrs Jones is looking tired and reports she is suffering from high blood pressure, which is proving
difficult to control. She explains that caring for her husband is getting harder as he is becoming more uncooperative and on a few occasions
has tried to hit her. Mrs Jones begins to cry and states that although she very much wishes to continue to look after her husband, she knows
she has come to the limit of her ability. The possibility of respite care is discussed with her, where her husband will live in a care setting for
set periods and live at home the rest of the time. Mr Jones starts respite care where it quickly becomes apparent that he is uncooperative while
receiving help in his personal care. He is also observed trying to hit another resident.


Understanding a person’s behaviour as a way of communicating a need, wish or feeling, is a challenge for paid care staff as well as family
caregivers. There are many factors that need to be considered in assessing behaviours that challenge. Physical health (including pain),
psychiatric phenomena such as hallucinations or delusions, social aspects such as the approach of others, and psychological factors such as
personality and attachment style, all must be taken into account (Bird & Moniz-Cook, 2008).

Case study concluded

The staff at the respite care centre are asked to make close observations in the first week and note when, where and with whom Mr
Jones challenging behaviour is taking place. This shows that the incidents did not all occur during caregiving interventions and that other
residents seemed to be at risk at irregular intervals.

More detailed functional analysis reveals a similar pattern. However some staff seem to experience less difficulties with Mr Jones. In team
discussions they describe that when they talk slowly and give Mr Jones one instruction at a time, he is less likely to show challenging
behaviour. This observation is consistent with the earlier findings in the cognitive assessment where Mr Jones had problems with short-term
memory and following a multistage command. It is also noted that Mr Jones is hard of hearing. The importance of clear communication is
stressed, ensuring Mr Jones has understood the treatment plan before any intervention is started. Personal care has proved difficult and the
possibility of a male carer or an older carer is explored. Mr Jones responds better to a male carer.

Observations in the public areas show that around meal times Mr Jones becomes more restless. His blood sugar levels are checked for 10
days. It transpires that Mr Jones’s sugar levels decrease and he is given some fruit about an hour before meal times.

The staff report an improvement in Mr Jones's behaviour with the staff, but there have been two more incidents where another resident
was hit. It appears that another confused resident (who wanders about) had stood behind Mr Jones’s chair on one occasion. Mr Jones had
turned around and hit him. Mr Jones had looked anxious and scared. It is possible that his past army experience and PTSD could be related to
the incidents. Due to Mr Jones's declining cognitive abilities and perceptual problems, he is less able to accurately evaluate a situation and his


responses are more automatic. It is likely that the perceived threat is enough to trigger a self-defence response. Staff continue to monitor his
behaviour and try to ensure that the wandering resident does not get too close to Mr Jones unexpectedly.

This scenario illustrates the complexity of assessing challenging behaviour and developing an effective intervention. A range of possible
antecedent factors need to be kept in mind, from physiological to cognitive and emotional. As well as developing a hypothesis about
the origins and function of the challenging behaviour, and developing interventions that modify the problem behaviour based on this
hypothesis, it is important to have good working relationships with carers who will be at the forefront in implementing interventions. This
is often difficult. Pre-existing relationship patterns between clients and care staff, staffing difficulties, or the care philosophy in residential
care settings may interfere with the behavioural assessment and intervention process.

Impact on professionals

Working with clients like Mr Jones can be complex. Factors contributing to the aetiology of presenting problems are usually
multidimensional. Assessments and interventions may span many sessions. Work with older people, because of its complexity, involves
working at different levels, from individual work, to marital and family therapy, to systems and organisational work, including education
and organisational consultancy. The individual work can entail pre-diagnostic counselling, psychological and neuro-psychological
assessments, diagnostic uncertainty, and the full range of psychotherapeutic interventions as well as cognitive rehabilitation. Psychologists
working with older adults must have a range of skills and knowledge readily available. If they are to be maximally effective they must
also have passion and commitment about working with this client group. Their approach towards the care of older adults should be both
person-centred and evidence-based. It should be of the highest standard and aim to help older adult clients achieve their full potential,
maximise their well-being, and enjoy a high quality of life. Fulfilling this role is challenging. The demands of executing all of the technical


tasks associated with offering a clinical psychology service to older adults may be discussed by trainee and early career psychologists in
supervision.

There is also a wide range of process issues (as distinct from technical issues) issues associated with working with older adults that may
be addressed in supervision.

Young professionals are confronted with the age and generational difference between themselves and older adult clients. When young
psychologists work with older adult clients who could be their parents or grandparents, this can raise transference and countertransference
dynamics in the therapeutic relationship. Older clients may respond to young professionals as if they were their children or grandchildren.
Psychologists’ relationship patterns that they have developed with their parents and grandparents may affect how they interact with older
adult clients. The personal views and prejudices that young professionals hold about older adults and ageing affects what they believe is
normal and abnormal about older adult clients. These views may also colour their experience of working with this client group. Working
with older adults involves being confronted with illness, deterioration in functioning, declining vitality, cognitive impairment, loss and the
inevitability of death. Furthermore it is not always possible for psychologists to improve older adult clients’ situation and ‘make them better’.
All of these issues are challenging and may trigger a range of emotive responses for trainee and early career psychologists. This wide range of
issues may be addressed and processed in supervision.

Pharmacotherapy for dementia

When psychologist work on multidisciplinary teams it is important for them to be informed about other interventions, including
pharmacological treatments, for problems of older adulthood. Often older people will be receiving pharmacological treatments for their
difficulties like anxiety, depression and sleep problems as discussed in Chapter 7. They can also be prescribed pharmacological interventions
that have been developed to address cognitive decline and challenging behaviour associated with dementia. Systematic reviews of trials and


meta-analyses of pharmacotherapy consistently show that acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine) and
memantine have a significant impact on cognitive decline in dementia associated with Alzheimer's disease, Lewy bodies and Parkinson's
disease (O’Brien & Burns, 2011; Tune, 2007). Until further evidence is available other drugs, including statins, anti-inflammatory drugs,
vitamin E and Ginkgo biloba, cannot be recommended either for the treatment or prevention of Alzheimer's disease (O’Brien & Burns, 2011).
A series of meta-analyses show that atypical antipsychotics, for example risperidone and olanzapine, are the most effective drugs currently
available for addressing challenging behaviour associated with some forms of dementia, although their effects are limited, confined to a
proportion of cases, and they entail significant side effects, including an increase in mortality and stroke. Their use should be short term
when the person is experiencing significant distress. They also exacerbate cognitive decline in Lewy body dementia (Madhusoodanan et al.,
2007; Schneider et al., 2006). Psychosocial treatments should always be considered as complementary or alternative interventions, and the
possibility that inadequately treated pain underlies agitation and distress should be considered (Husebo et al., 2011).

Guidelines

Guidelines for clinical practice in working with older adults who present with psychological problems have been developed by a range of
organisations (American Psychiatric Association, 2010; American Psychological Association, 2014; Guss et al., 2014a, 2014b; NICE, 2007).
The approaches to practice described in this chapter are consistent with these international guidelines.

Summary

Normal ageing involves some degree of cognitive decline. However, longitudinal studies of cognitive changes associated with ageing tend to
show much less extensive cognitive decline than cross-sectional studies. Cohort effects are thought to account for a large proportion of age
differences in cognitive abilities. Fluid abilities decline earlier than crystallised abilities. Speed of information processing is possibly the


fundamental cognitive change associated with ageing. Despite changes in neuro-physiology, most older people maintain good cognitive
functioning, by focusing resources on the areas of most importance or interest to them, by optimising goal-relevant means, and by
practising more or deploying compensatory strategies to address areas of declining functioning. Health problems and lifestyle choices may
also affect cognitive functioning. About a fifth of older adults develop dementia. Dementia is associated with a range of conditions including
Alzheimer’s diseases, Lewy body dementia and vascular dementia. To devise the most comprehensive intervention package for older adults
with dementia, multidisciplinary assessment is often needed. Pre-diagnostic counselling provides an opportunity to establish rapport,
understand clients’ level of awareness of their problems, concerns about the assessment, and address issues of consent and confidentiality.
A comprehensive neuropsychological assessment should be routinely conducted in evaluating older adults with possible dementia. Other
areas to cover are physical and mental health, including mood and anxiety problems. Collateral interviews with next of kin or carers should
also be conducted. The DSM-5 and ICD-10 provide diagnostic frameworks for dementia. Diagnostic assessment should, where possible,
identify the subtype of dementia. From the results of assessment, case formulation, and knowledge of the evidence base on interventions,
an individualised treatment plan may be made. Specific interventions for people with dementia need to be implemented within a framework
of values and principles that upholds the individuality of the person with dementia, offers choice, dignity and respect, and recognises the
human value and personhood of the person with dementia. Cognition, emotion, behaviour and stimulation are the four major areas of focus
for interventions. While there are a few specific interventions for dementia, such as reminiscence and life review work, most psychological
therapeutic work with older people is little different from work with younger adults. Issues that arise more commonly in treatment with
older people include adversity, cognitive impairment, physical health status, anti-therapy beliefs, and dependence upon others. In working
with older adult clients, interventions for carers usually forms part of the overall treatment plan. Carers’ subjective experience of burden, in
terms of perceived strain, impact on health and depression, is affected by a variety of factors including the carer's personality, coping skills,
attributional styles, and available resources, as well as to the relationship between carer and care-recipient. In addition to burden, caring may
also be associated with satisfaction and rewards. Interventions with carers may include using behavioural techniques to modify the


behaviour of the care-recipient, teaching the carer techniques for managing stress and anxiety, providing education and problem-solving
training to carers, mobilising family resources, and enhancing social support networks. Psychological interventions are often undertaken
with professional care staff where clients exhibit challenging behaviour. The aim is to understand the behaviour as a communication of a
need, wish or feeling, in the context of the person's physical and mental health, coping style, personality and attachment styles. Good
supervision allows clinical psychologists to explore and recognise how personal views about age, ageing, illness and loss are impacting them
and their work.
Exercises
Using the case of Mr Jones from the chapter, assign roles of therapist, Mr and Mrs Jones and an observer. Role-play the following scenarios,
changing roles after each:
1, Pre-diagnostic counselling session, at which you discuss Mr Jones's concerns and expectations about assessment, and address issues of
consent and confidentiality.
2. Post-assessment session with Mr Jones, at which you outline the results of assessment, share the diagnosis, and discuss strategies for
management.
3. A session with Mrs Jones at which you help her come to terms with her changed role and the grieving process, as well as exploring
alternatives she might try in coping with challenging behaviours.
Further reading for practitioners
Dening, T., & Thomas, A. (2013). Oxford Textbook of Old Age Psychiatry (Second Edition). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.


Guss, R. et al. on behalf of the BPS Faculty of Psychology of Older People. (2014). A Guide to Psychosocial Interventions in Early Stages
Dementia. Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society.
Guss, R. et al. on behalf of Faculty of Psychology of Older People. (2014). Clinical Psychology in the Early Stage Dementia Care Pathway.
Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society.
Laidlaw, K., & Knight, B. (2008). Handbook of Emotional Disorders in Later Life: Assessment and Treatment. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Laidlaw, K., Thompson, L. W., Dick-Siskin, L., & Gallagher-Thompson, D. (2003). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy with Older People.
Chichester: Wiley.
Pachana, N., & Laidlaw, K. (2014). Oxford Handbook of Clinical Geropsychology. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Woods, R. T., & Clare, L. (2008). Handbook of the Clinical Psychology of Ageing (Second Edition). Chichester: Wiley.

Evidence summaries
Woods, B., Clare, L.. & Windle, G. (2012). Dementia and related cognitive disorders. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.), The Handbook of
Evidence-Based Practice in Clinical Psychology (Volume 2, Adult Disorders, pp. 97-131). New York: Wiley.
Woods, R.. & Roth, A. (2005). Effectiveness of psychological interventions with older people. In A. Roth & P. Fonagy (Eds.), What Works
for Whom? A Critical Review of Psychotherapy Research (Second Edition, pp. 425-446). New York: Guilford.

Assessment instruments

Mood and quality of life


Derogatis, L. R. (1993). BSI Brief Symptom inventory: Administration, Scoring, and Procedure Manual (Fourth Edition). Minneapolis, MN:

National Computer Systems.

Logsdon, R. G., Gibbons, L. E., McCurry, S. M., & Teri, L. (2002). Assessing quality of life in older adults with cognitive impairment.

Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 510-519. (QoL-AD)

Smith, S. C., Lamping, D. L., Banerjee, S., Harwood, R. H., Foley, B., Smith, P., et al. (2006). Development of a new measure of health-related

quality of life for people with dementia: DEMQOL. Psychological Medicine, 37, 737-746.

Yesavage, J., Brink, T., & Rose, T. (1983). Development and validation of a geriatric depression scale. A preliminary report. Journal of

Psychiatric Research, 17, 37-49. (GDS)

Zigmond, A. S., & Snaith, R. P. (1983). The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 67, 361-370. (HADS)
Mental state and cognitive screening

Brooke, P., & Bullock, R. (1983). Validation of a 6-item cognitive impairment test with a view to primary care usage. International Journal

of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14, 936-940. (6-CIT)

Golding, E. (1989). Middlesex Elderly Assessment of Mental State. Hampshire, UK: Thames Valley Test Company. (MEAMS)

Hsieh, S., Schubert, S., Hoon, C., Mioshi, E., & Hodges, J. R. (2013). Validation of the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination III in

Frontotemporal Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 36, 242-250. (ACE-III)

Mattis, S. (1988). Dementia Rating Scale. Odessa, FL: PAR. (DRS)

Mioshi, E., Dawson, K., Mitchell, J., et al. (2006). The Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination Revised (ACE-R): A brief cognitive test battery

for dementia screening. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21, 1078-1085. (ACE-R)


Nasreddine, 2. S., Philips, N. A., Bédirian, V., et al. (2005). The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A brief screening tool for mild
cognitive impairment. Journal of American Geriatric Society, 53, 695-699.
Randolph, C. (1988). RBANS Manual: Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status. San Antonio, TX: Psychological
Corporation.
Roth, M., Huppert, F., Mountjoy, C., & Tym, E. (1999). CAMDEX-R The Revised Cambridge Examination for Mental Disorders of the Elderly.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. (CAMDEX-R)
Premorbid ability
Nelson, H., & Willison, J. (1991). The National Adult Reading Test—Manual. Windsor: NFER-Nelson. (NART)
Wechsler, D. (2001). Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR). San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Wechsler, D, (2011). Test of Premorbid Functioning-UK version (TOPF-UK). London: Pearson Assessment.
Current intellectual functioning
Wechsler, D. (2008). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Fourth Edition (WAIS IV). San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Wechsler, D. (2011). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence-Second Edition (WASI-II). San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Attention
Robertson, I., Ward, T., Ridgeway, V., & Nimmo-Smith, I. (1994). Test of Everyday Attention (TEA). San Antonio, TX: Pearson.


Memory
Baddeley, A. D., Emslie, H., & Nimmo-Smith, I. (1994). Doors and People. San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Benton, A. (1974). The Revised Visual Retention test. New York, NY: Psychological Corporation.
Warrington, E. (1984), Recognition Memory Test Manual. Windsor, UK: NFER-Nelson.
Wechsler, D. (2009). Wechsler Memory Scale-Fourth Edition (WMS-IV) Technical and Interpretive Manual. San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Wilson, B., Cockburn, J., & Baddley, A. (2008). The Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test (Third Edition). London: Pearson Assessment.
(RBMT)
Language
DeRenzi, E., & Faglioni, P. (1978). Normative data and screening power of a shortened version of the Token test. Cortex, 14, 41-49
Powell, G. Baily, S., & Clark, E. (1980). A very short version of the Minnesota Aphasia Test. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology,
19, 189-194.
Warrington, E. K. (1997). The Graded Naming Test: a restandardization. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 7, 143-146. (GNT)
Visuospatial skills
Warrington, E. K., & James, M. (1991). Visual Object and Space Perception Battery. San Antonio, TX: Pearson. (VOSP)


Executive function
Burgess, P. W., & Shallice, T. (1997). The Hayling and Brixton Tests. London: Pearson Assessment.
Delis, D. C., Kaplan, F., & Kramer, J. H. (2001), Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Wilson, B. A., Cockburn, J., & Baddeley, A. D. (1996). Behavioural Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome. London: Pearson Assessment.
(BADS)

Behaviour problems
Gilleard, C. (1984). Living with Dementia. Kent, UK: Croom Helm. (Contains Problem Checklist).
Greene, J., Smith, R., Gardiner, M., & Timbury, G. (1982). Measuring behavioural disturbance of elderly demented patients in the
community and its effects on relatives: A factor analytic study. Age and Ageing, 11, 121-126. (Contains the behavioural and mood
disturbance scale).
Moniz-Cook, E., Woods, R., Gardiner, E., Silver, M., & Agar, S. (2001). The Challenging Behaviour Scale (CBS): Development of a scale for
staff caring for older people in residential and nursing homes. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 40(3), 309-322.
Pattie, A., & Gilleard, C. (1979). Manual for the Clifton Assessment Procedures for the Elderly (CAPE). Sevenoaks, UK: Hodder and
Stoughton.


Activities of daily living
Holbrook, M., & Skilbeck, C. (1983). An activities index for use with stroke patients. Age and Ageing, 12, 166-170.
Lawton, M., & Brody, E. (1969). Assessment of older people: Self-maintaining and instrumental activities of daily living. Gerontologist, 9,
179-186. (IADL & PSMS)
Mahurin, R., DeBettignies, B., & Pirozzolo, F. (1991). Structured assessment of independent living skills. Preliminary report of a
performance measure of functional abilities in dementia. Journal of Gerontology, 46, 58-66.
Pfeffer, R., Kurosaki, T. Harrah, C., Chance, J., & Filos, S. (1982). Measurement of functional activities of older adults in the community.
Journal of Gerontology, 37, 323-329. (FAQ)

Overall staging of dementia
Hughes, C., Berg, L., Danzinger, W., et al. (1982). A new clinical scale for the staging of dementia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 140, 566-
572. (Contains the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale)
Reisberg, B., Sclan, S., Franssen, E., et al. (1993). Clinical stages of normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease: The GDS staging system.
Neuroscience Research Communications, 13 (Supplement), 551-554.


Carer strain
Agar, S., Moniz-Cook, E., Orbell, S., Elston, C., & Wang, M. (1997). Measuring the outcome of psychosocial intervention for family
caregivers of dementia sufferers: A factor analytic study. Aging & Mental Health, 1(2), 166-175. (Relatives Stress Scale—RSS)
Robinson, B. (1983). Validation of a Caregiver Strain Index. Journal of Gerontology, 38, 344-348.
Zarit, S., Reever, K., & Bach-Peterson, J. (1980). Relatives of the impaired elderly: Correlates of feelings of burden. The Gerontologist, 20,
649-655.

Further reading for people with dementia, families and carers
For a carefully selected list of titles under four categories: ‘Information and advice’; ‘Living well with dementia’; ‘Support for relatives
and carers’; and ‘Personal stories’ visit http://reading-well.org.uk/books/books-on-prescription/dementia/support-for-relatives-and-
carers. The books are available ‘on prescription’ from health professionals in libraries across England.

References
Aguirre, E.. Woods, R. T., Spector, A.. & Orrell, M, (2013), Cognitive stimulation for dementia: A systematic review of the evidence of
effectiveness from randomised controlled trials. Ageing Research Reviews, 12, 253-262.
Alexopoulos, G. S$, (2005). Depression in the elderly. Lancet, 365, 1961-1970.


Allen-Burge, R., Stevens, A. B., & Burgio, L. D. (1999). Effective behavioural interventions for decreasing dementia-related challenging
behaviour in nursing homes. International. journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14(3), 213-232.

American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2010). Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients with Alzheimer's Disease and Other
Dementias (Second Edition). Washington, DC: Author.

American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.

American Psychological Association. (2014). Guidelines for psychological practice with older adults. American Psychologist, 69 (1) 34-65.
Baltes, PB, & Baltes, M. M. (1990). Psychological perspectives on successful aging: the model of selective optimization with
compensation. In P. B. Baltes & M. M. Baltes (Eds.), Successful Aging: Perspectives from the Behavioural Sciences (pp. 1-34). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Barrowclough, C., King, P., Colville, J., Russell, E., Burns, A., & Tarrier, N. (2001). A randomized trial of the effectiveness of cognitive-
behavioural therapy and supportive counseling for anxiety symptoms in older adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69,
756-762.

Bhalla, R. K., Butters, M. A., Mulsant, B. H., Begley, A. E., Zmuda, M. D., Schoderbek, B., et al. (2006). Persistence of neuropsychologic
deficits in the remitted state of late-life depression. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14, 419-427.

Bird, M., & Moniz-Cook, E. D. (2008). Challenging behaviour in dementia: a psychosocial approach to intervention. In R. T. Woods & L.
Clare (Eds.), Handbook of the Clinical Psychology of Ageing (Second Edition, pp. 571-594). Chichester: Wiley.

Bohlmeijer, E., Smit, F., & Cuijpers, P. (2003). Effects of reminiscence and life review on late-life depression: A meta-analysis.
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 18, 1088-1094

Bonwick, R., & Morris, P. (1996). Post-traumatic stress disorder in elderly war veterans. International. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 11,
1071-1076.


Breckenridge, J. N., Gallagher, D., Thompson, L. W., & Peterson, J. (1986). Characteristic depressive symptoms of bereaved elders. journal
of Gerontology, 41, 163-168.

Brodaty, H., Green, A., & Koschera, A. (2003). Meta-analysis of psychosocial interventions for caregivers of people with dementia. journal
of American Geriatrics Society, 51, 657-664

Brooke, P., & Bullock, R. (1999). Validation of a 6-item cognitive impairment test with a view to primary care usage. International Journal
of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14(11), 936-940.

Cheston, R., Jones, K., & Gilliard, J. (2003). Group psychotherapy and people with dementia. Aging & Mental Health, 7, 452-461.
Chung, J., & Lai, C. (2002). Snoezelen for dementia. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (4), CD003152.

Clare, L. (2002). Assessment and intervention in dementia of Alzheimer type. In A. Baddeley & M. D. Kopelman, & B. A. Wilson (Eds.), The
Handbook of Memory Disorders (Second Edition, pp. 711-739). Chichester: Wiley.

Clare, L., Goater, T., & Woods, B. (2006). Illness representations in early-stage dementia: A preliminary investigation. International
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21, 761-767.

Clare, L., Linden, D. E., Woods, R. T., Whitaker, R., Evans, S. J., Parkinson, C. H., et al. (2010). Goal-oriented cognitive rehabilitation for
people with early-stage Alzheimer’s disease: A single-blind randomized controlled trial of clinical efficacy. American Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry, 18, 928-939.

Crawford, J. R., Stewart, L. E., Cochrane, R.H.B., Foulds, J. A., Besson, J.A.0., & Parker, D. M. (1989). Estimating premorbid IQ from
demographic variables: regression equations derived from a UK sample. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 28, 275-278.

Cukierman, T., Gerstein, H. C., & Williamson, J. D. (2005). Cognitive decline and dementia in diabetes—systematic overview of
prospective observational studies. Diabetologia, 48, 2460-2469.


Cullum, S., Huppert, F., McGee, M., Dening, T., Ahmed, A., Paykel, E. S., & Brayne, C. (2000). Decline across different domains of cognitive
function in normal ageing: results of a longitudinal population-based study using CAMCOG. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
15, 853-862

Davies, A.D.M. (1996). Life events, health, adaptation and social support in the clinical psychology of late life. In R. T.Woods (Ed.),
Handbook of the Clinical Psychology of Ageing (pp. 115-140). Chichester: Wiley.

Deary, I., Whalley, L. J, Lemmon, H., Crawford, J. R., & Starr, J. M. (2000). The stability of individual differences in mental ability from
childhood to old age: follow-up of the 1932 Scottish Mental Survey. Intelligence, 28, 49-55.

Dent, O. F,, Waite, L. M., Bennett, H. P., Casey, B. J., Grayson, D. A., Cullen, J. S., Creasey, H., & Broe, G. A. (1999). A longitudinal study of
chronic disease and depressive symptoms in acommunity sample of older people. Aging & Mental Health, 3(4), 351-357.

Division of Clinical Psychology. (2013). Alternatives to Antipsychotic Medication: Psychological Approaches in Managing Psychological and
Behavioural Distress in People with Dementia (Briefing paper). London: British Psychological Society.

Downs, M., Clibbens, R., Rae, C., Cook, A., & Woods, R. (2002). What do general practitioners tell people with dementia and their families
about the condition? A survey of experiences in Scotland. Dementia, 1(1), 47-58.

Elwood, P. C., Pickering, J., Bayer, A., & Gallacher, J.E.J. (2002). Vascular disease and cognitive function in older men in the Caerphilly
cohort. Age & Ageing, 31, 43-48

Erikson, E. (1963). Childhood and Society (Second Edition). New York: Norton.

Erikson, E. H., Erikson, J. M., & Kivnick, H. Q. (1986). Vital Involvement in Old Age. New York: Norton.

Feil, N. (1993). The Validation Breakthrough: Simple Techniques for Communicating with People with “Alzheimer's Type Dementia”.
Baltimore, MD: Health Professions Press.

Gallagher-Thompson, D., & Steffen, A. M. (1994). Comparative effects of cognitive-behavioural and brief psychodynamic
psychotherapies for depressed family caregivers. journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 62, 543-549.


Gatz, J. L., Tyas, S. L., St John, P., & Montgomery, P. (2005). Do depressive symptoms predict Alzheimer's disease and dementia? Journal of
Gerontology: Biological Sciences & Medical Sciences, 60A, 744-747.

Gibson, F. (2004). The Past in the Present: Using Reminiscence in Health and Social Care. Baltimore, MD: Health Professions Press.

Golding, E. (1989). Middlesex Elderly Assessment of Mental State. Titchfield, Hampshire, UK: Thames Valley Test Company.

Gould, R. L., Coulson, M. C., & Howard, R. J. (2012a). Cognitive behavioural therapy for depression in older people: A meta-analysis and
meta-regression of randomized controlled trials. Journal of American Geriatrics Society, 60, 1817-1830.

Gould, R. L., Coulson, M. C., & Howard, R. J. (2012b). Efficacy of cognitive behavioural therapy for anxiety disorders in older people: A
meta-analysis and meta-regression of randomized controlled trials. journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 60, 218-229.

Guss, R. et al. on behalf of Faculty of Psychology of Older People. (2014b). Clinical Psychology in the Early Stage Dementia Care Pathway.
Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society.

Guss, R. et al. on behalf of the BPS Faculty of Psychology of Older People. (2014a). A Guide to Psychosocial Interventions in Early Stages
Dementia. Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society.

Haight, B. (1992). The structured life-review process: A community approach to the ageing client. In G.M.M. Jones & B.M.L. Miesen (Eds.),
Care-giving in Dementia (pp. 272-292). London: Routledge.

Holden, U. P., & Woods, R. T. (1995). Positive Approaches to Dementia Care (Third Edition). Edinburgh, UK: Churchill Livingstone.

Hsieh, S., Schubert, S., Hoon, C., Mioshi, E., & Hodges, J. R. (2013). Validation of the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination III in
frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 36, 242-250.

Husebo, B. S., Ballard, C., Sandvik, R., Nilsen, O. B., & Aarsland, D. (2011). Efficacy of treating pain to reduce behavioural disturbances in
residents of nursing homes with dementia: Cluster randomised clinical trial. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 343 (7816), 1-10.

Ikin, J. F., Creamer, M. C., Sim, M. R., & McKenzie, D. P. (2010). Comorbidity of PTSD and depression in Korean war veterans: Prevalence,
predictors, and impairment. Journal of Affective Disorders, 125(1), 279-286.


Jorm, A. F. (2000). Does old age reduce the risk of anxiety and depression? A review of epidemiological studies across the adult life span.
Psychological Medicine, 30, 11-22.

Jorm, A. F,, Scott, R., & Jacomb, P. (1989). Assessment of cognitive decline in dementia by informant questionnaire. International Journal
of Geriatric Psychiatry, 4, 35-39.

Kenn, C., Wood, H., Kucyj, M., Wattis, J. P., & Cunane, J. (1987). Validation of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Rating Scale (HADS) in
an elderly psychiatric population. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 2, 189-193

Kitwood, T. (1997). Dementia Reconsidered: The Person Comes First. Buckingham, Kent, UK: Open University Press.

Kitwood, T. (1990). The dialectics of dementia: with particular reference to Alzheimer's disease. Ageing & Society, 10, 177-196.

Kraaij, V., Arensman, E., & Spinhoven, P. (2002). Negative life events and depression in elderly persons: A meta-analysis. The Journals of
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 57(1), P87-P94.

Kraaij, V., & de Wilde, E. J. (2001). Negative life events and depressive symptoms in the elderly: A life span perspective. Aging & Mental
Health, (1), 84-91.

Kuypers, J. A., & Bengtson, V. L. (1973). Social breakdown and competence. A model of normal aging. Human Development, 16, 181-201.
Laidlaw, K., Thompson, L. W., Dick-Siskin, L., & Gallagher-Thompson, D. (2003). Cognitive Behaviour Therapy with Older People.
Chichester: Wiley.

Lee, S. M., Roen, K., & Thornton, A. (2014). The psychological impact of a diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. Dementia, 13(3), 289-305
Lin, F.R., Yaffe, K., Xia, J., Xue, Q., Harris, T. B., Purchase-Helzner, E., et al. (2013). Hearing loss and cognitive decline in older adults.
Journal of American Medical Association Internal Medicine, 173(4), 293-299.

Livingston, G., Barber, J., Rapaport, P., Knapp, M., Griffin, M., King, D., ... & Cooper, C. (2013). Clinical effectiveness of a manual based
coping strategy programme (START, STrAtegies for RelaTives) in promoting the mental health of carers of family members with
dementia: pragmatic randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journal, 347, £6276.


MacPherson, S., Bird, M., Anderson, K., Davis, T., & Blair, A. (2009). An art gallery access programme for people with dementia: “You do it
for the moment”. Aging & Mental Health, 13(5), 744-752

Madhusoodanan, S., Shah, P., Brenner, R., & Gupta, S. (2007). Pharmacological treatment of the psychosis of Alzheimer’s disease what is
the best approach. CNS Drugs, 21 (2), 101-115.

McGilton, K. S., Rivera, T. M., & Dawson, P. (2003). Can we help persons with dementia find their way in a new environment? Aging &
Mental Health, 7(5), 363-371.

Mittelman, M. S., Ferris, S. H., Shulman, E., Steinberg, G., Ambinder, A., Mackell, J. A., & Cohen, J. (1995). A comprehensive support
program: effect on depression in spouse-caregivers of AD patients. Gerontologist, 35, 792-802

Moniz-Cook, E., Stokes, G., & Agar, S. (2003). Difficult behaviour and dementia in nursing homes: five cases of psychosocial intervention.
Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 10(3), 197-208

Moniz-Cook, E., Woods, R. T., & Richards, K. (2001). Functional analysis of challenging behaviour in dementia: the role of superstition.
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16(1), 45-56.

Moorey, S. (1997). When bad things happen to rational people: Cognitive therapy in adverse life circumstances. In P.Salkovskis (Ed.),
Frontiers of Cognitive Therapy (pp. 450-469). New York: Guilford.

Nasreddine, Z. S., Phillips, N. A., Bédirian, V., Charbonneau, S., Whitehead, V., Collin, I., ... Chertkow, H. (2005). The Montreal Cognitive
Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(4), 695-699.
Neal, L. A., Hill, N., Hughes, J., Middleton, A., & Busuttil, W. (1995). Convergent validity of measures of PTSD in an elderly population of
former prisoners of war. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 10, 617-622.

Newson, R. S., & Kemps, E. B. (2005). General lifestyle activities as a predictor of current cognition and cognitive change in older adults: a
cross-sectional and longitudinal examination. Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 60(3), 113-120.


NICE. (2007). Dementia. The NICE-SCIE Guideline on Supporting people with Dementia and their Carers in Health and Social Care. London:
National Institute of Clinical Excellence.

Nolan, M. R., Grant, G., & Keady, J. (1996). Understanding Family Care. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.

O'Brien, J. T., & Burns, A. (2011). Clinical practice with anti-dementia drugs: A revised (second) consensus statement from the British
Association for Psychopharmacology. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25(8), 997-1019.

Offord, R., Hardy, G., Lamers, C., & Bergin, L. (2006). Teaching, teasing, flirting and fighting: A study of interactions between participants
in a psychotherapeutic group for people with a dementia syndrome. Dementia, 5 (2), 167-195

Orgeta, V., Qazi, A., Spector, A. E., & Orrell, M. (2014). Psychological treatments for depression and anxiety in dementia and mild
cognitive impairment. Cochrane Reviews (1), CD009125.

Oyebode, J. (2008). Death, dying and bereavement. In R. T. Woods & L. Clare (Eds.), Handbook of the Clinical Psychology of Ageing (Second
Edition, pp. 75-94). Chichester: Wiley.

Pearce, J. (2002). Systemic therapy. In J. Hepple, J. Pearce, & P. Wilkinson (Eds.), Psychological Therapy with Older People (pp. 76-102).
Hove, UK: Brunner-Routledge.

Prince, M., Bryce, R., Albanese, E., Wimo, A., Ribeiro, W., & Ferri, C. P. (2013). The global prevalence of dementia: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Alzheimer's & Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association, 9(1), 63-75.

Pusey, H., & Richards, D. (2001). A systematic review of the effectiveness of psychosocial interventions for carers of people with
dementia. Aging & Mental Health, 5(2), 107-119.

Randolph, C. (1998). The Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status. Sidcup: Psychological Corporation.
Reynolds, C. F., Frank, E., Perel, J. M., Imber, S. D., Cornes, C., Miller, M. D., ... Kupfer, D. J. (1999). Nortriptyline and interpersonal
psychotherapy as maintenance therapies for recurrent major depression: a randomized controlled trial in patients older than 59 years.
Journal of American Medical Association, 281, 39-45.


Salthouse, T. A. (2000). Steps toward the explanation of adult age differences in cognition. In T. J. Perfect & E. A. Maylor (Eds.), Models of
Cognitive Aging (pp. 19-49). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Schaie, K. W. (2005). What can we learn from longitudinal studies of adult development? Research in Human Development, 2(3), 133-158.
Schaie, K. W. (2008). A lifespan developmental perspective of psychological ageing. In K. Laidlaw & B. G. Knight (Eds.), Handbook of
Emotional Disorders in Later Life (pp. 3-32). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Schaie, K. W., Willis, S.L., & Pennak, S. (2005). An historical framework for cohort differences in intelligence. Research in Human
Development, 2, 43-67.

Schneider, L. S., Dagerman, K., & Insel, P. S. (2006). Efficacy and adverse effects of atypical antipsychotics for dementia: meta-analysis of
randomized, placebo controlled trials. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14 (3), 191-210.

Scholey, K. A., & Woods, B. T. (2003). A series of brief cognitive therapy interventions with people experiencing both dementia and
depression: a description of techniques and common themes. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 10, 175-185.

Skilbeck, C. E. (1996). Psychological aspects of stroke. In R. T.Woods (Ed.), Handbook of the Clinical Psychology of Ageing (pp. 283-301).
Chichester: Wiley.

Smith, A. (2004). Clinical uses of mindfulness training for older people. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 32(04), 423-430.
Snowdon, D. A. (2003). Healthy aging and dementia: findings from the Nun study. Annals of Internal Medicine, 139, 450-454.

Solomon, Z., & Prager, E. (1992). Elderly Israeli Holocaust survivors during the Persian Gulf War: a study of psychological distress.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 1707-1710.

Spector, A., Thorgrimsen, L., Woods, B., Royan, L., Davies, S., Butterworth, M., & Orrell, M. (2003). Efficacy of an evidence-based cognitive
stimulation therapy programme for people with dementia: randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 183, 248-254.
Stokes, G., & Goudie, F. (1990). Counselling confused elderly people. In G. Stokes & F. Goudie (Eds.), Working with Dementia (pp. 181-190).
Bicester, UK: Winslow Press.


Stroebe, M., Schut, H., & Stroebe, W. (2007). Health outcomes of bereavement. Lancet, 370, 1960-1973

Subramaniam, P., & Woods, B. (2012). The impact of individual reminiscence therapy for people with dementia: Systematic review. Expert
Reviews in Neurotherapeutics, 12(5), 545-555.

Subramaniam, P., Woods, B., & Whitaker, C. J. (2013). Life review and life story books for people with mild to moderate dementia: A
randomised controlled trial. Aging & Mental Health, 18, 363-375.

Suhr, J. Anderson, S., & Tranel, D. (1999). Progressive muscle relaxation in the management of behavioural disturbance in Alzheimer's
disease. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 9, 31-44

Sung, H., & Chang, A. M. (2005). Use of preferred music to decrease agitated behaviours in older people with dementia: A review of the
literature. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 14(9), 1133-1140.

Teri, L., Logsdon, R. G., Uomoto, J., & McCurry, S. M. (1997). Behavioural treatment of depression in dementia patients: a controlled
clinical trial. Journal of Gerontology, 52B, P159-P166

Thompson, L. W., Gallagher, D., & Breckenridge, J. S. (1987). Comparative effectiveness of psychotherapies for depressed elders. Journal
of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 55, 385-390.

Tune, L. (2007). Treatments for dementia. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A Guide to Treatments That Work (Third Edition, pp. 105-143).
New York: Oxford University Press.

Tuokko, H., & Zarit, S. H. (2003). Mild cognitive impairment. Aging & Mental Health, 7(4), 235-237.

valentijn, $.A.M., Van Boxtel, M.PJ., Van Hooren, S.A.H., Bosma, H., Beckers, H.J.M., Ponds, R.W.H.M,, et al. (2005). Change in sensory
functioning predicts change in cognitive functioning: Results from a 6-year follow-up in the Maastricht aging study. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 53(3), 374-380.

van den Dungen, P, van Kuijk, L., van Marwijk, H., van der Wouden, J., Moll van Charante, E., van der Horst, H., et al. (2014). Preferences
regarding disclosure of a diagnosis of dementia: A systematic review. International Psychogeriatrics, 26(10), 1603-1618.


van Weert, J.C.M., van Dulmen, A. M., Spreeuwenberg, P.M.M., Ribbe, M. W., & Bensing, J. M. (2005). Behavioural and mood effects of
snoezelen integrated into 24-hour dementia care. Journal of American Geriatrics Society, 53, 24-33

Vernooij-Dassen, M., Huygen, F., Felling, A., & Persoon, J. (1995). Home care for dementia patients. Journal of American Geriatrics Society,
43, 456.

Vinkers, D. J., Gussekloo, J., Stek, M. L., Westendrop, R.G.J., & van-der-Mast, R. C. (2004). Temporal relation between depression and
cognitive impairment in old age: Prospective population based study. British Medical Journal, 329, 881-883.

Wechsler, D. (1999). Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.

Wechsler, D. (2011). Test of Premorbid Functioning—UK version (TOPF-UK). London: Pearson Assessment.

Wetherell, J. L., Liu, L., Patterson, T. L., Afari, N., Ayers, C.R., Thorp, S. R., ... Petkus, A. J. (2011). Acceptance and commitment therapy for
generalized anxiety disorder in older adults: A preliminary report. Behaviour therapy, 42(1), 127-134.

Windle, G., & Woods, R. T. (2004). Variations in subjective well-being: the mediating role of a psychological resource. Ageing & Society,
24, 583-602

Woods, R. T. (1999a). The person in dementia care. Generations, 23(3), 35-39

Woods, R. T. (1999b). Promoting well-being and independence for people with dementia. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 14,
97-109.

Woods, R. T. (2001). Discovering the person with Alzheimer's disease: cognitive, emotional and behavioural aspects. Aging & Mental
Health, S(Suppl. 1),$7-S16.

Woods, R. T. (2003). Evidence-based practice in psychosocial intervention in early dementia: how can it be achieved? Aging & Mental
Health, 7, 5-6.

Woods, R. T., & Bird, M. (1999). Non-pharmacological approaches to treatment. In G. Wilcock & K. Rockwood & R. Bucks (Eds.), Diagnosis
and Management of Dementia: A Manual for Memory Disorders Teams (pp. 311-331). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.


Woods, R. T., Bruce, E., Edwards, R. T., Elvish, R., Hoare, Z., Hounsome, B., et al. (2012). REMCARE: Reminiscence groups for people with
dementia and their family caregivers— Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness pragmatic multicentre randomised trial. Health Technology
Assessment, 16(48), 1-116.

Woods, R. T., & Charlesworth, G. (2002). Psychological assessment and treatment. In R. Jacoby & C. Oppenheimer (Eds.), Psychiatry in the
Elderly (Third Edition, pp. 245-263). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Woods, R. T., & Clare, L. (2008). Psychological interventions with people with dementia. In R. T. Woods & L. Clare (Eds.), Handbook of the
Clinical Psychology of Ageing (Second Edition, pp. 523-548). Chichester: Wiley.

Woods, R. T., Moniz-Cook, E., Iliffe, S., Campion, P., Vernooij-Dassen, M., Zanetti, O., & Franco, M. (2003). Dementia: issues in early
recognition and intervention in primary care. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 96, 320-324.

Woods, R. T., & Roth, A. (2005). Effectiveness of psychological interventions with older people. In A. Roth & P. Fonagy (Eds.), What Works
for Whom? A Critical Review of Psychotherapy Research (Second Edition, pp. 425-446). New York: Guilford.

World Health Organization. (1992). The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic
Guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

Xuereb, J. H., Brayne, C., Dufouil, C., Gertz, H., Wischik, C., Harrington, C., ... Huppert, F. (2000). Neuropathological findings in the very
old: results from the first 101 brains of a population-based longitudinal study of dementing disorders. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 903, 490-496.

Yale, R. (1995). Developing Support Groups for Individuals with Early Stage Alzheimer's Disease: Planning, Implementation and Evaluation.
Baltimore, MD: Health Profession Press.

Zarit, S.H., & Edwards, A. B. (2008). Family caregiving: research and clinical intervention. In R. T. Woods & L. Clare (Eds.), Handbook of
the Clinical Psychology of Ageing (Second Edition, pp. 255-288). Chichester: Wiley.


Section 6 Approaches to psychological distress related to complex childhood trauma


Chapter 27 Dialectical behaviour therapy for borderline personality disorder
Skye Fitzpatrick and Janice R. Kuo

DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-27
Case study
Jamie was a client who met criteria for borderline personality disorder (BPD) and was treated with dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT) in the
Behavioural Research and Therapy Clinics at the University of Washington. Jamie reflects the typical BPD client, coming into treatment with
multiple diagnoses and a high number of self-harming and suicidal behaviours. The case study follows Jamie through 1 year of treatment
and highlights the basic structure, modes and strategies utilized in standard DBT. The reader new to DBT may not initially understand the
rationale and strategies illustrated in the case. The remainder of the chapter however, will describe DBT in detail and refer to the case study
to facilitate understanding of the treatment and ultimately provide the reader with a comprehensive orientation to DBT.

Jamie was a 33-year-old single, Caucasian female living in a suburban area. Her father contacted the therapist, saying that Jamie's previous
therapist did not feel qualified to treat her for her non-suicidal self-injurious behaviour and she was terrified that Jamie would kill herself.
Jamie was a college graduate, and at the beginning of treatment was working in advertising. At age 16 she was diagnosed with major


depression with suicidal ideation and at age 21 she was hospitalized for a suicide attempt and continuing suicide ideation. A year prior to
receiving treatment at the clinic, Jamie was hospitalized for 12 weeks. Most of her friends were no longer interested in friendship after that.

At the start of DBT Jamie had a history of three suicide attempts (two overdoses and one attempt to stab herself to death), and multiple
instances of self-cutting and infliction of burns. Jamie was cutting herself at least once weekly. At her first session she reported that she was
“addicted” to cutting herself, saying that she enjoyed watching the blood drops as she cut. Jamie met criteria for a DSM-IV diagnosis of BPD
(meeting eight out of the nine diagnostic criteria), obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorder with agoraphobia, and major depression.
Her panic attacks were particularly distressing to her, as she invariably sobbed uncontrollably during each panic episode. She felt humiliated
by the sobbing, running out of groups whenever she would start to cry or felt like crying. Ordinarily whenever a panic attack started,
Jamie would call one of her parents for coaching and soothing. Frequently one of them would go and pick her up or if she were at her
own apartment would go over to her apartment to help calm her down. Her mother's response vacillated between giving her oversimplistic
suggestions (just smile) to lying down on the bed with her and handing her tissues. At the start of treatment, Jamie had also just broken up
with her former fiancé and boyfriend of 4 years, complaining that she was always attracted to the wrong men.

Jamie came to the first session with her parents who were extremely worried that she was going to kill herself. Jamie also wanted them
there because she was having trouble remembering things and wanted them to help her. The therapist conducted a behavioural assessment
of Jamie's problem behaviours and helped her determine what her goals were for therapy. Jamie reported that she was “a mess,” and that
her goal for therapy was to stop having panic attacks and become a “normal” person. Throughout the session, the therapist highlighted the
overriding dialectic in DBT of balancing acceptance with change by validating the difficulty of Jamie's situation, while also communicating
the necessity for change in order for her to reach her goals. The therapist oriented Jamie and her parents to the theory, rationale and structure
of DBT. Additionally, the therapist employed various DBT commitment strategies to obtain and strengthen her commitment to stay alive,
stay in therapy and stop cutting herself.


At the second session, the therapist oriented Jamie to the diary card, which allowed her to track and monitor her problem behaviours
during the week. While reviewing the diary card at the third session, Jamie reported her urges to self-injure and commit suicide had
increased over the week and were currently very high (S on a S-point scale). Upon assessment of suicide risk, Jamie indicated that, if she
were to kill herself, she would use a gun, cut herself or overdose. The therapist then assessed Jamie's access to lethal means, discovering that
Jamie did not have a gun, but did have both sharp knives and a lethal quantity of prescription medications. In taking her history of suicidal
behaviour, it was clear that Jamie had a definite pattern of impulsive behaviours, and thus there was a risk that she would impulsively
overdose on her medications. Jamie, on the other hand, was unwilling to do anything to make herself safer. She viewed suicide as a way
out of misery and did not want her ability to kill herself limited in any way. The therapist addressed Jamie's self-harming intentions and
wish to retain access to lethal means through an analysis of the pros and cons of committing suicide. This highlighted that there was no
evidence that a person's life would be better after suicide. In this conversation Jamie indicated that she believed in reincarnation, and was
worried that, if she killed herself, she would come back only to suffer again. The therapist capitalized on this worry to strengthen Jamie's
fears of committing suicide. This particular argument worked at getting her to let go of the idea that she had to hold on tightly to lethal
means during the next week. After much discussion, Jamie agreed to give her medications to her father who would keep them and give her
non-lethal amounts as needed and further agreed to call her therapist that evening to verify that she had indeed given the medications to
her family. At the conclusion of the session, Jamie was still expressing significant hopelessness and misery and was ambivalent about life
and death. Before leaving the session, the therapist spent time troubleshooting problems that might arise in keeping Jamie's commitment to
staying alive until the next session. In particular, they created a crisis plan that included using a variety of specific crisis survival skills and
problem-solving strategies and, if they did not work, calling the therapist for coaching.

DBT hierarchically targets life-threatening behaviours, therapy-interfering behaviours, and quality of life-interfering behaviours.
Therefore, Jamie's treatment targets focused on her current suicide ideation, pattern of cutting, panic attacks and distress over attending
skills group and various situations at work. The therapist personalized Jamie's diary card by adding panic as a field, and the frequency


and intensity of panic attacks, and self-injurious and suicidal acts were monitored throughout the week. Each time Jamie cut herself or
experienced a panic attack, a detailed chain analysis was conducted to determine the events that triggered and followed the panic episode. A
number of chain analyses revealed that Jamie's panic attacks were followed by an intense fear of losing control and, when experiencing this
loss of control, she would cut herself to regulate her emotions. The therapist highlighted the problematic behaviours in this chain, and, in
sessions, exposed her to the cues that triggered the panic attacks. Initially, it was very difficult for the therapist to determine what the cue
was, but after several chain analyses, it was apparent that the experience of shame was the usual cue. Therefore, the therapist did formal
exposure sessions to shame-evoking cues. During these sessions, Jamie’s anxiety would initially increase, and the therapist would instruct
her to pay attention to the physiological sensations that accompanied the anxiety and shame until the anxiety went down. If Jamie called
the therapist during a panic attacks that occurred between sessions, the therapist would coach her in the exposure procedure until the panic
subsided. During panic episodes where Jamie could not comply with any exposure directions she was directed to fill a large bowl with ice
water and put her face in the ice water for 30 seconds. This ordinarily had the immediate effect of reducing arousal after which she could
follow the exposure procedures. As Jamie's sense of control over her own emotions increased, her intense urges to commit suicide started to
decrease.

As the panic attacks decreased, reports of “rage attacks” typically directed at her mother emerged. In these, Jamie would scream at her
parents, stomp around the house, slam doors and hit her mother. Her mother would pull back and leave her alone following these episodes.
Her father would respond by hugging Jamie hard to stop her and then would walk her to her room and soothe her while sitting on her bed.
The therapist feared that the parent's reactions to Jamie's attacks might be reinforcing them. This was a difficult point to get through to
Jamie, as she could not separate the concept of reinforcement from the concept of unconscious intent. After much discussion this point was
made and Jamie asked the therapist to explain it to her parents. At a family session the therapist, Jamie, and her parents devised a plan where,
if Jamie attacked either parent, or broke anything in the house during a rage episode, she would get in her car immediately, go back to her
apartment and stay there for at least an hour. Under no circumstances was either parent to soothe her or back off from Jamie. After much


sobbing, Jamie agreed to the plan. The contingency was designed to capitalize on both extinction and punishment. That the behaviour at
home stopped after one episode suggested that it was the punishment value of the contingency that was working. If it had been extinction,
one would have expected the behaviour to escalate before it went down. By this time, Jamie's panic attacks were subsiding, but she was fired
from her job for crying and staying at home. She had stayed home from work every time she thought she would cry. Therefore, her parents
were assisting her financially.

Jamie found a new job as an editorial assistant. Her pattern of morning vomiting and frequent sick days at new jobs continued, however.
To explain her absences from her new job, Jamie told her new boss that she had tried to kill herself previously and had been diagnosed with
borderline personality disorder. She quickly became too ashamed of her emotional state to go near her boss and the quality of work began
to deteriorate, primarily from her excessive worry about what her boss was thinking of her. Within a short period of time, she was laid off.
Jamie then decided not only did she pick the wrong men, but the wrong jobs, and was therefore fatally flawed. She quickly got a new job.
The treatment plan shifted to a focus on viewing ruminating and worry thoughts as emotional escape behaviours, functioning similarly to
cutting, thinking about being dead, attacking her parents, and staying home from work. This rationale made sense to Jamie and she began
refocusing attention on the physiological sensations of emotions whenever she was starting to ruminate or think about suicide. Jamie had
also learned the principles of reinforcement. Although she was afraid she would vomit on the bus to work, she did not want to reinforce
getting sick by staying at home. On her own, she decided to go to work and bring a pail (for vomit) with her on the bus.

With self-injury stopped and panic attacks and rage episodes now almost completely gone, therapy focused on developing a Jamie
developing a new social support system with people who didn’t know she had been hospitalized. She joined a rowing club and began rowing
every morning and most evenings. She gradually began building a new network of friends. She got an enormous sense of mastery from
rowing and began feeling that she indeed could take care of herself. She also began tentatively dating,

At this time, Jamie's suicidal ideation and negative emotions significantly decreased and she was actively confronting her fears. She
still easily felt overwhelmed and out of control, but did not experience panic attacks. Sessions mainly addressed difficulties with anger,


shame, and interpersonal relationships. By the tenth month of therapy, Jamie’s previously dysregulated behaviours were under her control
signalling that she was ready for Stage 2 of DBT. In Stage 2 treatment focused on exposure to trauma events, particularly, Jamie’s shame of
having a psychological disorder. Three months into Stage 2, Jamie showed significant progress and expressed a desire to take a break from
therapy. By now she still had the same job and had developed new coping skills. Her rage had decreased, but she was still looking to get into
arelationship with someone. She terminated after approximately 1 year of treatment.

What follows is a transcript from a session when Jamie was 2 months into therapy. It represents actual examples and techniques that were
used in Stage 1, when Jamie expressed frequent and intense non-suicidal self-injurious ideation and urges. This transcript was chosen to
illustrate several basic DBT strategies.

The session begins with reviewing the diary card. In DBT, the purpose of the diary card is to monitor information about the client's
targeted behaviours that have occurred during the previous week. For example, the card indicates whether or not a non-suicidal self-
injurious act has occurred, or if a client engaged in skilful behaviours. Additional information is also collected, such as the client's use of
medications and his or her urges to quit therapy at pre and post-session. Diary cards enable the therapist to track the client's behaviour
between sessions and also serve to structure the targets of each therapy session.

Therapist (T): Did you engage in any self-harm since I saw you last week?

Client (C): No.

T: How about your urges to harm yourself?

C: Probably a five. [Out of five]

T: When? Today?

C: Yesterday and today.

T: Oh, so they have started to go back up again?

¢c:Um hmm.


T: We have to talk about that don’t we? Ok, and how about your suicide ideation yesterday and today?

C: Five.

T: And what would you say your mood swings have been?

C: Five.

T: Ok, so coming down the hall today, while you were sitting out there waiting for me, what was your urge to harm?

C: Five.

T: You were actually thinking about harming yourself?

¢c:Um hmm.

T: Ok. And how about your urge to quit therapy?

C: A five.

T: (Surprised laugh). You are mad at me I take it.

Therapist uses Level 3 validation by articulating the unarticulated.

T: And how about your urge to kill yourself?

C: A five.

T: Well, we ought to talk about the urge to quit therapy for sure because that’s new. Have you ever given a five before? I don’t think so in the
whole time I have known you. Ok, what’s on your agenda?

C: Hopelessness.

T: You would like to get that to go down?

¢c:Um hmm.

The therapist sets the agenda according to the DBT target hierarchy by first attending to suicide and life-threatening behaviours, followed
by any behaviours that interfere with therapy.


T: All right. So when did you have the panic attack?

The therapist is addressing a panic attack the client experienced in the week prior.

C:It started during group.

T: That’s when you started crying during group?

(Client nods.)

T: So what we ought to work on is how that happened.

¢: [know how it happened.

T: Well, how are we going to make it not happen. Because this is almost identical to what happened to you at work. So the good news is that
it is happening right in front of us so we can work on it.

The therapist uses the dialectical strategy “making lemonade out of lemons” by highlighting that, when out-of-session dysfunctional
behaviour occurs in session, it is a prime opportunity to work on decreasing those behaviours and learn more adaptive behaviours. The
therapist targeted crying because of its functional relationship to higher-order targets, namely, that crying at work often served as a
precursor to Jamie leaving work and, ultimately quitting her job.

T: [going over diary card] Ok, so we have urges to self-harm, urges to commit suicide, and urges to avoid, because you have lots of urges to
avoid. Okay, so that’s the order. And then emotions I put down are panic, sadness, shame, anger, fear and anxiousness. Because don’t you
think fear, anxiousness and panic are different?

¢c:Um hmm.

T: And then, do you know what the “r” means over here?

Cc: No.

T: Ok, what that means is that I want you to start working on reinforcing yourself, doing something that reinforces you when you have a
day when you have a lot to do and are skilful doing it. Because what we are going to work on is learning how to self-reinforce. Now see the


bottom? What we are trying to do is increase your belief or sense that you can control your emotions, your behaviour and your thoughts. So
zero is “Iam completely out of control,” and a five is “I am in very good control, lam where I want to be.” Normal control.

C: So zero is bad and five is good.

T: Right. We don’t want to say good and bad, we say zero is none and five is adequate.

The therapist replaces judgemental words with non-judgemental words. Increased awareness and subsequent replacement of judgements
is typically emphasized in DBT mindfulness skills. BPD individuals are often judgemental of themselves and others in both positive and
negative terms. In mindfulness, the client is encouraged to take a non-judgemental stance, seeing everything simply as it is.

¢c: Ok.

T: Ok, so um, the fact that you want to quit therapy sounds like you are angry at me. Is that true?

[Prolonged silence]

C: [Coughs] I just don’t get why my parents can't be involved because we are a close-knit family.

T: What do you mean they can’t be involved?

C: Sounds like you are, you know, shutting me out from my parents.

T: How so?

C: Because you say they reinforce me. You know I needed them there last night and you made it sound like it was a bad thing. I can't do it
alone.

T: That's true. [The therapist validates the fact that Jamie can’t do it alone.] So let's talk about what I did and see whether we agree. What did
Isay?

C: You said for my parents to go home. You make it sound like any interaction with them is like meddling or going to ruin therapy or
something.


T: Let me just tell you how I think about it okay? My perspective has been that when you get really upset, panic or emotional, your parents
move in very close. What I would rather see is your parents moving in very close before you get really upset or when you are recently happy.
So what happened last night was, you stormed out of group and then your parents moved in, and so in effect there was no consequence for
you avoiding. So what I would rather have is you stay in group the whole time, then your parents move in big time. But the facts are last night
you were not alone, you were at group, and you could have stayed. You were actually not alone at all and you left.

¢c: Oh.

T: So my worry is that if, whenever you leave, your parents come in and are soothing, then in effect there is really not a consequence. In
effect, the consequence is that your parents become closer to you the more upset you get and that’s never a good situation for everyone. This
is really not unique to you. I would say this is about anyone.

The therapist presents didactic information on the principles of reinforcement. She highlights that, when Jamie's parents move in close
after she engages in dysfunctional behaviours, Jamie is reinforced for the dysfunctional behaviour. Specifically, the therapist emphasizes
that, after leaving group early, the client's parents attended to her, thereby reinforcing her behaviour of leaving group.

C: Well, when you are upset you need people.

T: I don’t know that you do. I think that when you are upset -

C:1 do need people.

T: You think you need people.

C: No I do need people.

T: Need them for what?

C: For support.

T: And why do you need support?

C: Because I am feeling really bad and I don’t want to be alone. And I am afraid that I might do something.


T: Right. But the point is that you were not alone, you left your group. You could have come back to group.

C: I didn’t want to come back to that fucking group!

T: This is true, you didn’t want to. But that is where the problem is. Leaving the group is just like leaving work. And that’s where the
problem has been at work. So what I am trying to help you do is not leave. But if whenever you leave, someone comes along and soothes you,
then there is really very little I can say that can possibly -

C: I was going to leave whether anyone was there or not.

T: The point [am making is that - 1 am not talking about intent okay? I am just talking about the consequence of leaving, where, when you
get upset, your parents get closer. This is never a good idea. It puts you in a very difficult hot spot.

C: [crying] So 1 am just supposed to sit there and be upset alone. The kind of upset that I get is despair.

T: That's sort of the dialectic. That's what we have to solve - the dialectic of how, for you, to have enough help for when you need help, and
also how to have it so you don't get reinforced. And the two of us have to figure it out. Because your point is very good when it comes to you
needing help. And my point is very good in that reinforcement will do you in at the end. This is a perfect case when you had help available
and you chose not to take it.

The therapist highlights the dialectic of needing help and support on the one hand, and how dysfunctional behaviours should not get
reinforced, on the other hand. The therapist emphasizes the truth in both positions and invites the client to join in and make a collaborative
effort on how to get support without reinforcing dysfunctional behaviour. The therapist also weaves in the use of validation, agreeing that
needing help is perfectly reasonable.

C: I didn’t have help available; it was group, that’s not help.

T: Certainly it is. And after group you could have talked to one of the group leaders.

C: Lam not going to sit there and cry in front of group the whole time and get nothing done.


T: This is what you and I have to work on. Solving this particular problem because this is the problem you also had at work. So why don’t
we move back and see what happened and see if we can figure out other ways for you to cope with it.

The therapist sets the stage for conducting a chain analysis on what went wrong while the client was in group, and how the client might
have been able to cope with things differently. Again, the therapist emphasizes the importance of dealing with this behaviour since it shows
up in the client's every-day life.

Clinical features of borderline personality disorder (BPD)

BPD is a life-threatening disorder characterized by severe cognitive, behavioural, and emotion dysregulation. Although the prevalence of
BPD in the general population is between 2% and 6% (Grant et al., 2008), individuals with BPD make up a large sector of the mental health
care system. They constitute 30% of psychiatric inpatient samples (Leontieva & Gregory, 2013), and 22% of outpatient psychiatric samples
(Korzekwa et al., 2008). Indeed, up to 95% of individuals with BPD have received individual therapy at some point in their lifetime and for
an average length of 50.6 months (i.e. over four years). Further, up to 72% of individuals with BPD have received psychiatric hospitalization
(Bender et al., 2001). The implications of these statistics are compelling in view of the extremely high lifetime prevalence of suicidal or
self-injurious acts (up to 84%; Soloff et al., 2002) and completed suicide (approximately 10%) in this group (Paris & Zweig-Frank, 2001).
Furthermore, research suggests that participants meeting all nine DSM-IV (APA, 1994) criteria of BPD have a suicide rate of 33% (Stone et
al., 1987). In DSM-III (APA, 1980), BPD was defined according to an eight-item criteria set, including affect instability, impulsive actions,
unstable interpersonal relationships, psychotic-like cognitions, social maladjustment and unstable identity (Skodol et al., 2002a, 2002b).
Subsequent revisions in DSM-IV (APA, 1994) and the text-revision of DSM-IV (APA, 2000) involved changing the “unstable identity” criterion
to capture instability of self-image, and adding a ninth criterion: “transient, stress-related severe dissociative symptoms or paranoid


ideation.” The most recent edition of the DSM, DSM-5 (APA, 2013), has made little changes to these nine criteria. Diagnostic criteria for BPD
from DSM-S (APA, 2013) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1992) are given in Table 27.1.
Table 27.1 Diagnostic criteria for borderline personality disorder
DSM-5 IcD-10
A pervasive pattern of instability of interpersonal Emotionally unstable personality disorder A personality disorder
relationships, self-image, and affects, and marked in which there is a marked tendency to act impulsively without
impulsivity, beginning by early adulthood and present in consideration of the consequences, together with affective instability.
a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the The ability to plan ahead may be minimal, and outbursts of intense
following: anger may often lead to violence or “behavioural explosions”; these
are easily precipitated when impulsive acts are criticized or thwarted
1. Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. _ by others. Two variants of this personality disorder are specified,
(Note: Do not include suicidal or self-mutilating and both share this general theme of impulsiveness and lack of self-
behavi ed in Criterion 5.) control. F60.30 Impulsive type The predominant characteristics are
aviour covered In miterion “ emotional instability and lack of impulse control. Outbursts of violence
2. A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal or threatening behaviour are common, particularly in response to
relationships characterized by alternating between criticism by others. Includes: explosive and aggressive personality
extremes of idealization and devaluation. (disorder). Excludes: dissocial personality disorder (F60.2). F60.31
3. Identity disturbance: markedly and persistently Borderline type Several of the characteristics of emotional instability
. are present; in addition, the patient's own self-image, aims, and
unstable self-image or sense of self. internal preferences (including sexual) are often unclear or disturbed.
sessesennstunttisstnsttinttisetinntisttinttinitisttinitiniiinntinstnntnnesneney HEFe are Usually chronic feelings of emptiness. A liability to become.


4. Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self- involved in intense and unstable relationships may cause repeated
damaging (e.g., spending, sex, substance abuse, reckless emotional crises and may be associated with excessive efforts to avoid
driving, binge eating). (Note: Do not include suicidal or abandonment and aseries of suicidal threats or acts of self-harm

(although these may occur without obvious precipitants). Includes:
self-mutilating behaviour covered in Criterion 5.) borderline personality (disorder).

5. Recurrent suicidal behaviour, gestures, or threats, or
self-mutilating behaviour.

6. Affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood
(e.g., intense episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety
usually lasting a few hours and only rarely more than a
few days).

7. Chronic feelings of emptiness.

8. Inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling
anger (e.g., frequent displays of temper, constant anger,
recurrent physical fights).

9. Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe
dissociative symptoms.

Note: Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association;
and adapted from ICD- 10 (WHO, 1992, pp. 204-205).


Aetiology of BPD

Biological factors

Although not well understood, the aetiology of BPD likely involves biological dysfunctions as well as environmental factors. Biological
factors have not been definitively identified, although a growing body of research has found strong associations between neurochemical
factors and some of the criterion behaviours for BPD. For example, impulsive aggression has been found to be associated with reduced
serotonergic activity or abnormalities in serotonergic systems (Paris et al., 2004), and some research has demonstrated a link between
affective instability and increased cholinergic activity in addition to increased noradrenergic activity (Goodman et al., 2008; Gurvits et al.,
2000; Skodol et al., 2002a). Further, there is some circumstantial evidence suggesting that increased dopaminergic activity is associated
with emotion dysregulation, impulsivity, and cognitive impairments (e.g. psychotic features; Friedel, 2004). Others have suggested that
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) dysfunction throughout development underpins the cognitive impairments inherent in BPD (Grosjean &
Tsai, 2007). Finally, research suggests that BPD may be characterized by lower endogenous opioid levels (Stanley & Siever, 2010), and that
behavioural dysregulation (e.g. self-harm) reflects an attempt to increase opioid and dopaminergic reward system activity (Bandelow et al.,
2010).

Brain and other physiological aberrations and their correlation with emotion dysregulation have also been identified. First, a host of
research demonstrates reduced hippocampal and amygdala volumes in BPD (de-Almeida et al., 2012; Hall et al., 2010; Nunes et al., 2009;
O'Neill & Frodl, 2012; Rodrigues et al., 2011; Ruocco et al., 2012). Moreover, studies examining functional brain activity suggest that persons
with BPD exhibit hyperreactivity of the amygdala (Mauchnik & Schmahl, 2010; O'Neill & Frodl, 2012), a structure implicated in processing
emotional responses (Phelps & LeDoux, 2005). Research also indicates that BPD is characterized by reduced activity in the prefrontal cortex
(Krause-Utz et al., 2014; Mauchnik & Schmahl, 2010; New et al., 2007), which has been implicated in decreasing emotional intensity and


emotion regulation (Davidson et al., 2000; Etkin et al., 2011). Indeed, some theory and research suggest that BPD may be characterized by
reduced connectivity between prefrontal structures and the amygdala, such that prefrontal structures do not reduce amygdala activity in
those with BPD to the same extent as that of healthy controls (New et al., 2007). These disturbances suggest that a weakening of prefrontal
inhibitory control may contribute to the hyperactivity in the amygdala.

Results of psychophysiological research has suggested that reduced basal parasympathetic activity (termed “vagal tone”) may be a
marker of trait-like emotional sensitivity (Beauchaine, 2001, Porges et al., 1994). Research has indicated that various disorders of emotion
dysregulation (e.g. generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, depression) including BPD, are characterized by attenuated basal vagal
tone (Beauchaine, 2001; Kuo & Linehan, 2009). In addition, a large body of physiological data suggests that individuals with BPD exhibit
heightened negative emotional arousal at baseline. Heightened baseline emotional arousal is evident across multiple physiological indices
such as heightened skin conductance responses, salivary cortisol and salivary alpha amylase (Feliu-Soler et al., 2013; Kuo & Linehan, 2009;
Scott et al., 2013).

Environmental factors

A number of environmental factors have also been proposed as important in the development of BPD. Linehan’s (1993a) biosocial theory
states that the criterion behaviours for BPD represent a pervasive dysfunction in emotion regulation, caused jointly by biological
vulnerability to high emotionality and an invalidating environment. According to Linehan (1993a), the invalidating environment (1)
chronically and inadvertently negates, rejects or dismisses an individual's behaviour and emotional expression; (2) punishes emotional
displays and intermittently reinforces emotional escalation; and (3) oversimplifies ease of problem solving and meeting goals. Consistent
with Linehan’s (1993a) notion of the invalidating environment, Zanarini and Frankenburg (1997) also state that a traumatic home
environment is one of the key antecedents to the subsequent development of BPD. Moreover, attachment theorists have similarly suggested
that BPD arises from the lack of a “secure base” in childhood, wherein the caregiver fails to cultivate an environment which promotes


understanding and acceptance of one’s own and other's emotional states (Fonagy et al., 2003). Accordingly, research indicates that higher
levels of insecure attachment and lower levels of secure attachment characterize BPD (see Levy, 2005, for review). A more recent
developmental model of BPD based on social baseline theory (Coan, 2008) states that a child’s ability to regulate emotions is disrupted by a
lack of accessibility to and responsivity of caregivers, which plays a role in subsequent emotion regulation problems and the development of
BPD (Hughes et al., 2012). In sum, various aetiological theories of BPD converge in suggesting that early environments disrupt subsequent
emotional processing and likely lead to the development of BPD. A substantial amount of research has found evidence for such an
environment, with a high percentage of BPD individuals reporting a number of adverse childhood events. Experiences of childhood neglect
and abuse are reported by a high percentage of individuals with BPD (Davidson et al., 2010; Widom et al., 2009). Of these events, childhood
sexual and emotional abuse appears to be the most prominent. Between 50% and 75% of individuals with BPD report some form of
childhood sexual abuse (Silk et al., 1995; Zanarini et al., 2000), and other studies suggest that emotional abuse predicts BPD over and above
other forms (including sexual abuse; Bierer et al., 2003). Unfortunately, there is very little prospective research and the retrospective data is
somewhat unreliable.

Genetic influences

Genetic factors contribute to the aetiology of BPD. These have only recently begun to be investigated. Several studies have provided evidence
of a familial component of BPD (e.g. Distel et al., 2008; Gunderson et al., 2011) and one twin study (Torgerson et al., 2000) has investigated
the concordance of “definite” BPD and “broad” BPD. Definite BPD refers to cases where the required number of DSM diagnostic criteria were
fulfilled. Cases that were one or two short items short of meeting full DSM diagnostic criteria were referred to as broad BPD. In monozygotic
twin pairs, the concordance was 35% and 38% for definite and broad BPD, respectively. In dizygotic pairs, the concordance was 7% and 11%
for definite and broad BPD, respectively. Later twin studies estimated that the heritability of BPD traits is 35-37.1% (Kendler et al., 2008;
Torgersen et al., 2008). These data provide evidence for a potential genetic component underlying BPD. Skodol et al. (2002b) have delineated


four emotion dysregulation factors associated with personality disorder traits: emotion dysregulation, unstable cognitive functioning,
unstable self and unstable interpersonal relationships. Genetic investigations estimate heritability of the group of characteristics at 47%
(Skodol et al., 2002a). Later studies suggests there may be a relationship between copies of the short allele of the serotonin transporter gene
polymorphism and BPD (Maurex et al., 2010; Ni et al., 2006), which is in keeping with this gene's previously established relationship to
suicidality, impulsive aggression and emotional lability (Courtet et al., 2001, 2004; Gonda et al., 2006; Lesch & Merschdorf, 2000).
Course of BPD

Data on the course of BPD and its chronicity are mixed. Some studies indicate that most cases remit within 10 years, while others show
that for most individuals, BDP runs a chronic course. Theory and research suggests that the onset of BPD is typically in late childhood
or adolescence (Baird et al., 2005; Zanarini et al., 2001). Some large-scale studies have reported that remission of criterion behaviours is
common. Most notably, one study reported that 88% of individuals with BPD who were hospitalized at the beginning of the study achieved
remission over the course of 10 years, with 39.3% of individuals achieving remission after 2 years and 61.6% achieving remission after 4
years (Zanarini et al., 2006). Another study has reported similar results, with 85% of individuals with BPD showing remission after 10 years
(Gunderson et al., 2011). However, other studies consistently indicate that the BPD runs a chronic course. For example, in one study, 2 years
after index assessment, over 70% of BPD individuals continued to meet diagnostic criteria (De Panfilis et al., 2011). Even in studies where
remission rates were more optimistic, approximately 30% of patients who experienced remission within 2 years of the index assessment
experienced subsequent recurrences of the disorder (Zanarini et al., 2010). Emerging research also suggests that there is variability in the
stability of different components of BPD; whereas emotional or affective instability is relatively stable over a 2-year period, self-injurious
behaviours and behaviours aimed at preventing abandonment are more malleable (McGlashan et al., 2005).


Comorbidity

BPD is commonly comorbid with a variety of psychological diagnoses, most notably substance misuse, panic disorder, eating disorders, post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major depressive disorder (MDD; for a review, see Skodol et al., 2002a, 2002b). BPD has a particularly
high prevalence with mood disorders; approximately 50-96.9% of individuals with BPD meet lifetime criteria for another mood disorder.
MDD is the most common mood disorder in BPD, with estimates of comorbid lifetime MDD in BPD ranging from 19% to 86.6% (Grant et
al., 2008; Tadic et al., 2009; Zanarini et al., 2004a). One study indicated that 98% of individuals with BPD also met criteria for an anxiety
disorder (Zanarini et al., 2004a), and 30-58.3% of individuals with BPD meet lifetime criteria for PTSD (Grant et al., 2008; Tadic et al., 2009;
Zanarini et al., 2004a). Among individuals with BPD selected for either a recent suicide attempt or a recent non-suicidal self-injury, up to
75% met criteria for MDD, 51.1% met criteria for PTSD, and 40.2% met criteria for panic disorder (Linehan et al., 2002).

BPD also has high comorbidity rates with other personality disorders (PD). Between 20% and 50% of those with BPD also meet diagnostic
criteria for avoidant personality disorder (Becker et al., 2000; Nysaeter & Nordahl, 2012; Zanarini et al., 2004a). In a sample of self-harming
or suicidal individuals with BPD, Linehan et al. (2002) found that 20.8% met criteria for avoidant PD, 8.9% met criteria for antisocial PD, and
7.9% met criteria for obsessive-compulsive PD. Other studies have thrown light on the range of comorbidity rates for BPD and other PDs.
Between 23% and 30% also meet criteria for antisocial PD (Becker et al., 2000; Zanarini et al., 2004a). Between 20% and 55.7% also meet
criteria for dependent PD (Becker et al., 2000; Zanarini et al., 2004a). Between 23.3% and 50% meet criteria for paranoid PD (Nysaeter &
Nordahl, 2012; Zanarini et al., 2004a).

Treatment and treatment response in BPD
It is estimated that 97% of individuals with BPD seeking treatment in the US receive outpatient treatment from approximately six therapists


each (Perry et al., 1990; Skodol et al., 1983). Of those who receive therapy, 95% have received individual therapy, 56% have received group
therapy, 42% have received family or couple therapy, 37% have received day treatment, 72% have received psychiatric hospitalization at
some point, and 24% have received treatment in a halfway house (Bender et al., 2001). Several authors have suggested that the outpatient
services available for this group do not match well with their needs, which may account for poor treatment compliance and subsequent
hospitalization (Rascati, 1990; Swigar et al., 1991), though emerging evidence suggests that this may not be the case with newer evidence-
based therapies (Barnicot et al., 2011). Indeed, research has indicated that treatment as it is usually administered in the community (TAU,
or treatment-as-usual) may have less than promising results, and dropout rates in these treatments are higher than in some evidence-
based treatments (Barnicot et al., 2011; Skodol et al., 2002c). Even among individuals with BPD who receive high amounts of psychosocial
treatments and/or pharmacotherapy, there is likely to be severe impairment in global satisfaction, social adjustment, and overall
functioning (Skodol et al., 2002c). However, recent developments have seen the emergence of important advancements in BPD treatment.
Empirically supported treatments

Currently, there are four treatments for BPD that have demonstrated varying levels of empirical support: DBT (Linehan, 1993a),
mentalization based therapy (Bateman & Fonagy, 2006), transference focused therapy (TFT; Kernberg et al., 1989) and schema-focused
therapy (SFT; Young et al., 2003).

Dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT)

Of the four evidence-based treatments, DBT has the strongest empirical support (Sneed et al., 2012). DBT is based on both a motivational
and capability deficit model of BPD, proposing that: (1) individuals with BPD lack important interpersonal, self-regulation (e.g. emotion
regulation) and distress tolerance skills; and (2) personal and environmental factors both inhibit the use of coping strategies the individual
does have, and reinforces dysfunctional behaviours. To date, 15 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) at 12 independent sites, and 19


controlled or pre-post trials across 18 independent sites, have examined the efficacy of DBT. This research generally supports the efficacy of
DBT as compared to a variety of control conditions across a range of outcomes including reductions in suicidal behaviours, hospitalizations,
dropout from treatment, anger, drug use, disordered eating, hopelessness, depression, impulsivity and interpersonal problems (Lynch et al.,
2007). Notably, suicide attempts were significantly lower following DBT compared to an array of comparison conditions in all trials, except
a few studies wherein DBT was compared with a strong comparison treatment and yielded equivalent outcomes (e.g. Clarkin et al., 2007;
McMain et al., 2009).

Mentalization based therapy

Another treatment for BPD that has also demonstrated compelling empirical support is Bateman and Fonagy’s (2006) psychodynamically
oriented mentalization based therapy. This treatment aims to increase the mentalization capacity of individuals with BPD, or ability to
recognize, understand, differentiate and accept one's own and other's emotional states. Mentalization based therapy shares some features
with DBT, in that both treatments are multimodal approaches that allow frequent accessibility to therapists, directly target behaviours that
interfere with therapy, emphasize current emotional experiences and balance the use of validation and change. A small but growing body of
literature suggests that mentalization based therapy results in reductions in suicidality, diagnostic status, service use, use of medications,
global functioning, depression, social functioning and hospitalization (Bales et al., 2012; Bateman & Fonagy, 2008, 2009; Jorgensen et al.,
2013; Sneed et al., 2012). Further, some evidence suggests this treatment is superior to control conditions such as treatment as usual in
reducing suicidality (Bateman & Fonagy, 2008, 2009).

Transference focused therapy

Transference focused therapy (Kernberg et al., 1989) is a psychodynamically informed treatment that is based on the assumption that BPD
is predominantly characterized by identity diffusion, or a failure to integrate self-concept and concepts of others arising from early life


experiences. Transference focused therapy aims to rectify identity diffusion by reconstructing representations of the self and others as they
are manifested through current transference-based processes. There are a handful of studies that suggest that transference focused therapy
results in significant reductions in a range of clinical outcomes including suicidal behaviours, anger, impulsivity, irritability, verbal and
direct assaults, depression, anxiety, psychosocial functioning, BPD severity and number of inpatient admissions (Clarkin et al., 2001; Clarkin
et al., 2007; Doering et al., 2010). One study suggested that transference focused therapy shows the same degree of reductions in suicidal
behaviours as DBT (Clarkin et al., 2007)

Schema-focused therapy

Schema-focused therapy (Young et al., 2003) is a cognitive behavioural-informed treatment that employs cognitive and behavioural
techniques to alter early dysfunctional schemas that are posited to underpin problematic emotional responses, behavioural patterns and
interpersonal relationships. There are two studies that suggest that schema-focused therapy (Giesen-Bloo et al., 2006), and group schema-
focused therapy as an adjunct to treatment as usual (Farrell et al., 2009), lead to improvements in BPD pathology. One RCT evaluating the
efficacy of schema-focused therapy relative to transference focused therapy suggested that, after 3 years of treatment, more clients in the
schema-focused therapy condition recovered, and clients had greater improvements in quality of life, than those in the transference focused
therapy condition (Giesen-Bloo et al., 2006). Schema-focused therapy is described in Chapter 29 of this volume.

Family therapy

There is one comprehensive family therapy approach to BPD that involves components of systems, dynamic and other theories and
practices (Glick et al., 1995). Glick et al.’s (1995) approach involves working collaboratively with the family to develop a therapeutic alliance
(“joining”), and to provide information on the symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of BPD (Glick et al., 1995). BPD symptoms are
reframed in terms of family dynamics, emphasizing the positive aspects of the family’s motivation to help the “identified patient.” Similar to


psychodynamic approaches (Gunderson, 1989; Kernberg, 1984), this treatment focuses on therapeutic transference and attends to familial
over-involvement and abuse/neglect. Currently, there are no data investigating the efficacy of this treatment approach.

There are also writings on ways to adapt DBT for family approaches, including family therapy sessions and expanding skills training to
include families (Fruzzetti, 1997; Fruzzetti & Iverson, 2006; Fruzzetti et al., 2007). There is a small body of research that shows that DBT
family skills trainings result in decreased burden and grief and increases in mastery in family members of individuals with BPD (Hoffman et
al., 2005), but significantly more research is needed.

Pharmacotherapy

Persons with BPD frequently utilize pharmacotherapy. The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) guidelines
synthesized available research on psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy for BPD and recommended that pharmacotherapy should not be
used to treat BPD pathology per se (NICE, 2009). However, though there is no identified “BPD drug,” studies have indicated that several
psychotropic agents may be associated with improved global functioning, depression, psychotic symptoms and aggressive behaviours (see
for review Leichsenring et al., 2011; Lieb et al., 2010; NICE, 2009). Results from placebo-controlled trials found that pharmacotherapy is
effective in targeting various dimensions of BPD such as cognitive-perceptual symptoms, emotion dysregulation or impulsive-behavioural
dyscontrol, though results are generally mixed or vary (Schmahl & Bohus, 2001; Soloff, 2000). Specifically, anticonvulsant drugs such as
lamotrigine (Tritt et al., 2005) and topiramate (Loew et al., 2006; Nickel et al., 2004, 2005) have been shown to be effective in decreasing
anger in addition to depressive symptoms, anxiety, hostility, interpersonal problems and somatization (in the case of topiramate).
Antipsychotic drugs such as haloperidol (Soloff et al., 1989, 1993), aripiprazole (Nickel et al., 2006, 2007), and olanzapine (Zanarini
& Frankenburg, 2001; Zanarini et al., 2004b) have been shown to be effective in reducing depressive symptoms, aggression/hostility,
impulsivity (haloperidol only), paranoia (olanzapine only) and stress (aripiprazole only), in addition to anxiety and anger (aripiprazole
and olanzapine). Antidepressants such as amitriptyline (Soloff et al., 1989), phenelzine (Soloff et al., 1989) and fluoxetine (Zanarini et al.,


2004b) have been shown to be effective in reducing depressive symptoms and aggression (fluoxetine only), in addition to anxiety, anger
and hostility (phenelzine only). Zanarini and Frankenburg (2003) reported that omega-3 fatty acids reduced aggression and depressive
symptoms in BPD, and achieved lower attrition rates due to the low side effects. More recently, Hallahan et al. (2007) showed that this
treatment reduced depressive symptoms and self-harm in BPD.

A note of caution is needed when considering the use of pharmacotherapy for BPD. Individuals meeting criteria for BPD are generally
noncompliant with treatment regimens, may experience unexpected unwanted effects, and may overdose on prescribed drugs. Therefore,
careful monitoring of pharmacotherapy is necessary in this group. For those interested in principles of prescribing, Soloff (2000)
presents a BPD medication algorithm based on a behaviourally specific approach. However, currently there are no data supporting the
effectiveness of this algorithm. Moreover, most comprehensive reviews of pharmacotherapy for BPD highlight that findings on the efficacy
of pharmacotherapy for BPD are generally mixed, do not compellingly support the use of any particular drug to treat BPD pathology, and
suggest that more research is needed (Leichsenring et al., 2011; Lieb et al., 2010; NICE, 2009).

Assessment of BPD

The need to assess BPD in clinical care settings cannot be overemphasized. It is often the case that treatment providers deal with clinical
cases that are progressively difficult to treat, only to later find that their clients meet criteria for BPD. The ways to assess BPD vary in ease
of administration, diagnostic validity, and treatment utility. There are a number of both BPD and general personality questionnaires which
can be used for initial diagnostic screening. Data suggest that self-report measures may more effectively assess experiential symptoms of
BPD such as identity disturbance and chronic feelings of emptiness, but interviews may be superior in assessing behavioural symptoms
such as self-harm or impulsivity. Consequently, research supports that combined self-report and interview formats yield the most reliable
assessments of BPD (Hopwood et al., 2008). We thus suggest beginning with self-report screening measures, and, if the client meets criteria,


a structured interview should follow. For example, the McLean Screening Instrument of BPD (MSI-BPD, Zanariniet al., 2003) has been shown
to have good sensitivity and specificity for identifying individuals meeting criteria for BPD.
Table 27.2 Structured interviews for assessing BPD
Structured interview Reference
Revised Diagnostic Interview for Borderlines (DIB-R) Zanarini, Gunderson, Frankenburg, & Chauncey,
1989
Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders (DIPD-IV) Zanarini, Frankenburg, Chauncey, & Gunderson,
1987
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR Axis II Personality Disorders (SCID- _ First, Gibbon, Spitzer, Williams, & Benjamin, 1997
m1)
International Personality Disorder Examination (IPDE) Loranger et al., 1994
Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality (SIDP-IV) Pfohl, Blum, & Zimmerman, 1997
Personality Disorder Interview-IV (PDI-IV) Widiger, Mangine, Corbitt, Ellis, & Thomas, 1995
Zanarini Rating Scale for Borderline Personality Disorder (ZAN-BPD) Zanarini, 2003
Quick Personality Assessment Schedule (PAS-Q) Tyrer, 2000
Of the diagnostic interviews, it cannot be determined which most validly assesses the BPD diagnosis (Kaye & Shea, 2000). The most
commonly used interviews are listed in Table 27.2.


Dialectical behaviour therapy: theory, basis and rationale

The biosocial theory

DBT is a treatment approach rooted in a dialectical philosophy that integrates traditional, cognitive-behavioural, change-based
interventions and acceptance-based approaches derived primarily from Zen Buddhist practice. Specific treatment interventions in DBT are
guided by the theory that BPD is the developmental outcome of the dialectical transaction between biological and environmental factors
over time (Linehan, 199 3a).

Linehan’s (1993a) biosocial theory (outlined earlier) posits that the core characteristic of BPD is emotion dysregulation and that BPD
criterion behaviours are either a direct outcome of, or function to modulate unwanted emotional experiences (Linehan, 1993a; McMain et
al., 2001). As a result, individuals with BPD experience extreme intense emotional reactions, and simultaneously lack the skills necessary
to regulate these reactions. Furthermore, these individuals “adopt” the invalidating environment, learning to invalidate or reject their
own private experiences, search the environment for cues on how to respond, and oscillate between extreme emotional expression and
inhibition

Linehan (1993a) defines emotion dysregulation as a composite of both emotional vulnerability and difficulties with regulating one’s
emotional response. According to this model, emotional vulnerability is characterized by high sensitivity (quick responses) and reactivity
(strong responses) to emotionally evocative stimuli, and a delayed return to emotional baseline. Such high emotional vulnerability, coupled
with impairments in regulating emotional responses, results in a variety of outcomes such as an inability to regulate physiological
arousal, inability to redirect attention away from emotionally salient stimuli, distortions of information processing, impulsive behaviours,
“freezing,” and difficulty with inhibiting mood-dependent behaviour or organizing behaviour in the service of non-mood-dependent goals


(Linehan, 1993a). A hallmark of this theory is the notion that emotion dysregulation is pervasive across the multisystemic emotional
response (e.g. physiological, expressive, subjective and action-oriented components of emotions) and contexts.

Philosophical basis: dialectics

As illustrated in Figure 27.1, there are three components that act in tandem to form the philosophical basis of DBT: dialectical philosophy,
behavioural science, and Zen Buddhism.

DBT adopts a dialectical world view that reflects an ever-changing, transactional process in which each action leads to a reaction (its
opposite), the resolution of which is a synthesis of both positions. From this perspective, everything in the universe is interrelated,
oppositional, and in polarity. The essence of dialectics is that there is a known sequence of thesis-antithesis-synthesis, embodying not a
static relation of events but rather a complex interplay inherent in the nature of truth, or competing truths. Reality is an activity, not an
event, movement rather than repose. The dialectical world view is translated into therapy by teaching the client that multiple tensions
will inevitably coexist. By teaching the client to acknowledge such polarizations and identify a synthesis between these extremes, change,
movement, and flow occur. This was exemplified in the transcript where Jamie’s therapist stated that, when Jamie's parents’ “moved in”
when she was upset, they reinforced her behaviour while, on the other hand, Jamie said that she couldn't get through the difficult times
without support. The therapist highlighted the dialectical tension that arose, and emphasized the need to find a synthesis. The model
of dialectical thinking constantly searches for “what is left out” of treatment and allows natural change to occur within the therapeutic
context. By highlighting and synthesizing contradictory positions, the client and therapist can arrive at new meanings and ultimately
produce change.

The overriding dialectic in DBT is between acceptance and change. The DBT therapist must master the difficult task of balancing
these two strategies within each treatment interaction. It is within this dialectic where the two other philosophical bases of DBT reside;
change principles in DBT are based on behavioural science and learning theories such as classical and operant conditioning, and skills


acquisitioning, strengthening, and generalization principles. Conversely, acceptance principles are derived from Eastern meditative and
mindfulness-based practices, particularly from Zen Buddhism. A balance between change and acceptance is seen across the core DBT
strategies: dialectics, validation, problem-solving, communication and case management strategies. These strategies will be described in
turn.
Zen Buddhism
Behavioural — Dialectical
Science Philosophy


Figure 27.1 Philosophical basis underpinning dialectical behaviour therapy
DBT as a comprehensive treatment
The DBT model combines both a motivational and capability-deficit model of behavioural dysfunction, necessitating interventions to
address both motivational and skills deficits. However, it is very difficult for therapists working with suicidal individuals with BPD
to manage crises while simultaneously shaping new, skilful behaviours and reduce incentives to engage in dysfunctional behaviours.
Consequently, standard outpatient DBT includes four primary treatment modes (individual psychotherapy, telephone consultation, skills
training, and therapists’ consultation meetings) in addition to uncontrolled ancillary treatments such as pharmacotherapy and acute-
inpatient psychiatric services. DBT addresses skill-building and motivational issues across these modes of treatment. For example,
individual therapy focuses on highlighting contingencies of behaviour and devising systems of contingency management to increase
adaptive function and decrease maladaptive behaviours. Individual therapy also focuses on skills generalization (e.g. through between-
session telephone consultation or other programmed activities), while a separate skills training group teaches clients new skilful behaviour.
DBT addresses five functions, each of which is carried out in the treatment modes outlined earlier. Each mode emphasizes one or more
of the following functions: (1) enhance capabilities, (2) improve motivational factors, (3) assure generalization to natural environment, (4)
enhance therapist capabilities and motivation to treat effectively and (5) structure the environment. Enhancing capabilities is targeted in
both individual sessions and skills group and consists of skills training and psychoeducation. Improving motivational factors is typically
targeted in individual psychotherapy by applying contingency and exposure-based procedures. Once these behaviours are acquired in the
therapy room, the therapist works to help these behaviours generalize to the client’s natural environment. This can be done through a variety
of ways, such as after hours and crisis phone coaching, case management, and email consultation. As persons with BPD are notoriously
difficult to treat, therapist capabilities and motivation to treat this group are also addressed. Through close supervision and use of the
consultation team (reviewed later), the acquisition and generalization of the behaviours necessary for effective treatment application are


targeted. Lastly, structuring the environment includes careful arrangement of administrative interactions, case management, and family
interventions. The details underlying these five functions will be described shortly.

DBT: structuring the treatment frame

DBT is designed to treat persons with BPD at all levels of severity and complexity, and is conceptualized as occurring in four stages of
treatment. The overarching goal over the course of treatment is for the client to have a life worth living, and each treatment stage sets the
client on the appropriate path to attain this goal. Within the DBT model, each stage of treatment matches the clinical complexity of the
client's “levels of disorder.” The levels of disorder in DBT are defined as: level 1 (behavioural dyscontrol), level 2 (quiet desperation), level 3
(problems in living) and level 4 (incompleteness). A majority of research to date has focused on severely and multiply disordered individuals
in level 1.

Stages of treatment

Pre-treatment: orienting and commitment

The goal of pre-treatment sessions is for the client and therapist to arrive at a mutual agreement to work with one another. Together, the
client and therapist negotiate a common set of expectancies to guide the initial steps of therapy. A description of DBT and the biosocial
theory is presented, and the client and therapist discuss how much change is expected, the goals of treatment, and any preconceptions
the client may have about treatment. When needed, the therapist attempts to modify the client's dysfunctional beliefs regarding therapy.
Strategies used in commitment and orienting are described later and are among the most important strategies during this phase of
treatment.


Stage 1. Establishing stability and behavioural control

In stage 1, the therapist's primary goal is to decrease severe behavioural dyscontrol and establish behavioural control. The focus of this stage
is to prevent out-of-control behaviours (e.g. behaviours due to the criterion behaviours of BPD, or due to comorbid disorders) and stabilize
the client. Clients are in stage 1 when their general level of functioning is low and work on the targets and goals of therapy are hampered
until out-of-control behaviours are under control. An example of this includes a client who is highly suicidal, with comorbid diagnoses of
PTSD and MDD. The first goal for this client would be to eliminate/reduce suicidal behaviours, as targeting PTSD and major depression would
be futile with a dead client. The primary targets of stage 1 are (hierarchically), to decrease life-threatening behaviours, therapy-interfering
behaviours and severe quality-of-life interfering behaviours, and to increase behavioural skills. The amount of time to get clients out of stage
1 may vary, but clients who are highly suicidal and severely dysfunctional at the start of treatment can be expected to make significant
progress after 1 year of treatment.

Suicidal and life-threatening behaviours

Any indication of imminent suicide, self-injury, homicide or significant aggression that poses serious threat must be explicitly addressed as
a first priority. Significant increases in suicide or aggressive ideation/communication and associated mood changes also need to be attended
to. In general, the hierarchical arrangement of targets is as follows: imminent threat; suicidal and non-suicidal self-injurious behaviours that
occurred since the previous session; and increases in suicidal or non-suicidal self-injurious urges. This hierarchy is used to set the session
agenda. As illustrated in the case study transcript, diary cards are very useful in stage 1, as it enables the therapist to carefully monitor
suicidal and non-suicidal self-injurious behaviours. It is relatively easy for therapists to forget to enquire about suicidal behaviours at every
session. Additionally, therapists might make assumptions that the client is not currently at high-risk. However, with a high-risk population
such as BPD, careful monitoring of these behaviours is integral to treatment. Diary cards allow the therapist to continuously track these


behaviours without relying on his or her memory or depending on the client's verbal report. In the case where a therapist is not aware of new
or increased suicidal behaviour, the diary card will prevent him or her from making the detrimental mistake of failing to intervene.
Therapy-interfering behaviours

The second target of stage 1 is to keep the client and therapist engaged collaboratively in therapy. Therapy-interfering behaviours are
important to address because these behaviours decrease the therapist's motivation to treat the client and also interfere with the client's full
participation of therapy. Even the most efficacious of treatments may be “diluted” if the therapist is burned out or the client is not fully
participating, or at session to receive the treatment. Examples of behaviours that are considered therapy-interfering are non-collaborative
behaviours, non-compliance and sporadic session attendance. It should be noted that therapy-interfering behaviours can occur on the part
of the client or therapist. Therapy-interfering behaviours on the part of the client also include behaviours that burn out the therapist (e.g.
behaviours that reduce the therapist’s motivation to treat a client). Therapy-interfering behaviours on the part of the therapist include
behaviours that unbalance therapy (e.g. extreme acceptance or change, flexibility or rigidity) and disrespectful behaviours (e.g. accepting
telephone calls in session, forgetting important facts about the client's life). Therapy-interfering behaviours are addressed directly and
consistently. They are dealt with in the therapy session and also at the consultation team meeting.

Quality of life-interfering behaviours

The third target is to reduce behavioural patterns that seriously impair the possibility of having a reasonable quality of life. Examples of
these include high-risk sexual behaviour, extreme financial difficulties and criminal behaviours. The goal here is for the client to achieve a
stable lifestyle that meets reasonable standards for safety and adequate functioning.

Behavioural skills

The fourth target is to increase skill acquisition and skill strength. These include mindfulness, interpersonal effectiveness, emotion
regulation, distress tolerance and self-management skills. The individual therapist monitors the acquisition of the skills over time, and


assists the client in applying the skills to his or her daily life. Of these skills, mindfulness is the centre of DBT. Mindfulness has to do with the
quality of both awareness and participation that a person brings to everyday living. It’s a way of living awake, non-judgementally, and with
one's eyes wide open. Unlike standard behaviour and cognitive therapies that emphasize change, a major part of mindfulness is learning to
bear pain skilfully. Mindfulness was adapted from Eastern practices and involves acceptance of the world as it is, embracing the notion that
everything is as it should be at this moment. Approaching life with this attitude is the epitome of radically accepting oneself, other people,
and the universe.

Interpersonal effectiveness skills involve helping the client decide what they want in difficult situations, and how to obtain their objective
with others while maintaining a positive relationship and self-respect. Emotion regulation skills target the reduction of emotional distress
through increasing positive events and mastery and decreasing negative events. Distress tolerance skills involve clients getting through
difficult situations without engaging in behaviours that make them worse. Finally, self-management skills pervade the other skills and
include the knowledge of fundamental principles of learning and behaviour change, the ability to set realistic goals, the ability to conduct
one’s own behaviour analysis, and the ability to implement contingency management plans.

Stage 2. Non-anguished emotional experiencing

The transition from stage 1 to stage 2 only occurs when targeted stage 1 behaviours are under control and client can refrain from severely
dysfunctional behaviours. The primary goal of stage 2 is to transition the client from a place of quiet desperation to emotional experiencing.
The main target is to decrease post-traumatic stress responses (e.g. distortion or denial of trauma, avoidance of traumatic cues), with an
emphasis on accepting and changing current patterns using exposure and cognitive modification.

Stage 3. Establishing ordinary happiness and unhappiness

In the third stage, the goal is to target the client’s problems in living and experience ordinary happiness and unhappiness. The primary


targets are to increase the client's respect for him or herself and decrease the individual’s problems in living. At stage 3, it is important for the
therapist to appropriately reinforce the client’s attempt to self-validate, self-care, and problem solve.

Stage 4. Attaining the freedom and capacity for joy

In the fourth and final stage, the goal is to help the client change their experience of incompleteness and, instead, have a capacity to
experience freedom and joy. Although most individuals are content with level 3 functioning, this stage is for individuals who still experience
some residual incompleteness. This is done by expanding awareness (of self, the past to the present, and of the self to others), and finding
spiritual fulfilment. By this stage, clients benefit most by engaging in insight-oriented psychotherapy and experiential treatments, and
finding spiritual meaning.

Functions and modes of treatment

Individual therapy

The focus of individual therapy is contingent on the treatment target hierarchy described earlier. The amount of session time dedicated
to any one target is determined by the client’s behaviours since the previous session, and any immediate problems that occur in session.
Although more than one target may be relevant in the session (e.g. self-harming behaviour or therapy-interfering behaviour), the higher-
priority target takes precedence.

The use of diary cards is extremely helpful in determining the foci of the sessions. These cards are filled out by clients during the week,
and monitor the occurrence of daily suicidal and self-harm behaviour, suicidal ideation, urges to commit suicide and self-harm, “misery,”
use of illicit drugs and prescribed drugs, and use of behavioural skills. As illustrated in the case study, diary cards may be personalized to
suit the current needs of the client. For each session, the individual therapist begins by reviewing the diary card, and by doing so effectively
structures the focus of the therapy session.


Skills training

Skills training occurs as a separate mode but concurrently with individual therapy. The rationale for this is that managing crisis-generating
behaviours and the contingencies related to implementation of new skills is difficult to address within the framework of individual therapy.
Consequently, a separate DBT skills training mode was developed to focus on skill acquisition and strengthening (Linehan, 1993b, 2014).
Typically, skills training occurs weekly for 2-2.5 hours and is held in a group setting. The goal of skills training is to teach skilful behaviours
to replace problem behaviours and strengthen these new, effective behaviours.

DBT skills training is highly structured. The first half of skills group sessions is devoted to homework review, during which clients discuss
the skills practised in the previous week and receive feedback on skills which they used. The second half of skills group sessions is primarily
didactic and follows a psychoeducational format. The target hierarchy for skills training differs from that of individual therapy. The targets
are to teach new skills; decrease behaviour that, if not addressed, would destroy the group (e.g. setting fire to the clinic); and decrease
therapy-interfering behaviour. This hierarchy supports the function associated with the mode, namely to enhance behavioural capabilities
through acquisition of skills. If crisis behaviours occur in group, the client is instructed to call his or her therapist or directly address it with
the primary therapist at the next session. There is some emerging evidence that skills training on its own can be an effective intervention for
BPD. For example, a 3-month RCT showed that skills training was superior to standard group therapy in preventing dropout and reducing
depression, anxiety, anger and emotional instability (Soler et al., 2009). Further, other emerging research highlights the importance of skills
training, suggesting that it mediates reductions in depression, suicide attempts, anger dyscontrol and nonsuicidal self-injury in standard
DBT for BPD (Neacsiu et al., 2010).

Telephone consultation
Telephone calls between sessions are considered an integral part of DBT. These phone consultations serve three purposes: (1) to provide


skills coaching outside of the skills group and generalize these skills to the client’s daily life; (2) to provide emergency crisis intervention;
and (3) to provide opportunities to immediately repair a therapeutic relationship. The focus of the phone conversations is contingent on
the nature of the call. In most situations the phone call focuses on skills coaching. However, if more complex problems are presented, the
focus is on helping the client determine what the problem is, ameliorating and tolerating distress, and inhibiting dysfunctional problem-
solving behaviours until the next session. If extensive problem solving is required, it is targeted in the next therapy session. The final purpose
of telephone calls is relationship repair. BPD clients often experience delayed emotional reactions to interactions occurring in the therapy
sessions. However, waiting a week before dealing with emotions related to the therapy relationship may lead to premature termination from
therapy, at worst, or unnecessary agony, at best. Thus, telephone contact can be used to soothe and reassure the client that the relationship
is not ruptured.

DBT therapeutic strategies

DBT therapeutic strategies refer to the role and focus of the therapist, as well as a coordinated set of procedures that serve to achieve the
specific treatment goals. The DBT therapeutic strategies include dialectical strategies, core strategies of validation and problem solving,
stylistic strategies, case management strategies and integrative strategies.

Dialectical strategies

The dialectical strategies permeate the application of all other DBT strategies. The dysregulated emotions and behaviours characteristic of
persons with BPD can be viewed as failures of dialectical synthesis, producing extreme and often polarized experiencing of the world. The
overarching goal of DBT is to replace these extreme patterns with dialectical ones. This is accomplished by eliciting opposites in emotional
states, thinking styles, and behavioural patterns, and by facilitating opportunities for growth through synthesis. The dialectical strategies
used in DBT serve to highlight these tensions and to provide the necessary conditions for eventual resolution through synthesis.


Balancing

One way that synthesis is promoted is through balancing the therapeutic style and treatment strategies. The therapist balances nurturing of
the client as he or she is in the moment with a benevolent demanding for change and applies a balance of acceptance-oriented and problem-
solving strategies. The therapist does this using a “forward-back movement” in response to the client. To use a metaphor, it is like trying to
help someone wiggle down a pipe; first move this way, and then that way. Mindfulness is especially crucial here, as this entails a moment-to-
moment analysis of where the client is at, and how to effectively respond.

Paradox

The purpose of paradox is to teach the client to tolerate ambiguity. Oppositions are highlighted such that the client experiences a “both
and” as opposed to an “either or” perspective. For example, in the case of Jamie, the therapist emphasized that her [Jamie's] need for parental
support was valid while simultaneously noting that the dysfunctional behaviours reinforced by her parents were not helpful. Rather than
seeing one as true and the other as false, both seen as are true. It is through the awareness of both positions, the partial truth of each, anda
resolving synthesis that change can occur.

Metaphor

The use of metaphor and playing devil’s advocate is prominent in traditional psychotherapy interventions (Levitt et al., 2000; Rasmussen,
2000). In DBT, the trick is to use metaphors spontaneously.

Devil's advocate

When playing devil's advocate, the therapist presents a propositional statement that is an extreme version of the client's dysfunctional
beliefs, and then plays the role of devil's advocate to counter the client's attempts to disprove the extreme statement. Playing devil's advocate
is commonly used in commitment sessions, but can be integrated in typical sessions as well.


Extending

Extending is a translation of a technique used in Aikido, a Japanese martial art (Saposnek, 1980). The idea of extending refers to taking the
client more seriously than he or she intends. The purpose of this technique is to allow the client’s problematic position to go to its natural
conclusion, while the therapist joins in with it, so it goes a bit further. By doing so, the client experiences a sense of imbalance, which allows
the therapist to shift the client away from the problematic position without the use of confrontation. For example, a client may say, “You are
a horrible therapist, I'm going to write a complaint about you,” with little intent of writing a complaint but with the expectation that the
therapist will focus on repairing any damage to the therapy relationship in order to prevent the client from writing the letter. A therapist
using extending, however, may suggest spending the session helping the client to write the letter because it is the therapist's job to help the
client to be as effective as possible.

Making lemonade out of lemons

This strategy is based on a genuine belief that whatever life presents truly can be changed into something positive and that the client can
play an integral part in making the change. An example of this is when a client tells the therapist that he or she has an angry employer who
makes work difficult. The therapist may respond by saying, “Too fabulous. A perfect opportunity for you to practise your skills.” When using
these dialectical strategies, the therapist allows natural change to occur and remembers that, when change is a loss, validate.

Core strategies

The core strategies of DBT are validation and problem solving, details of which are given shortly. Validation strategies are most reflective of
the acceptance-oriented aspect of DBT while problem-solving strategies are most reflective of the change-oriented aspect of DBT.

Validation

Validation is defined as “The action of validating or making valid ... a strengthening, reinforcement, confirming; an establishing or ratifying


as valid” (Oxford English Dictionary; Simpson & Weiner, 1989). In DBT, validation serves as an acceptance strategy to balance change. In
addition, it strengthens clinical progress, the client's ability to self-validate and the therapeutic relationship, and provides feedback. When
using validation, it is important for the therapist to use it appropriately. It does not mean “making” something valid, nor does it mean
validating that which is invalid. Therefore, therapists need to be mindful of validating only the valid, so as to avoid reinforcing dysfunctional
behaviours.

Validation in DBT can occur at any one of six levels. Each level is more complete than the previous one and depends on one or more of
the previous levels. The levels of validation can be divided into emotional validation strategies, behavioural validation strategies, cognitive
validation strategies, and cheerleading strategies.

Level one validation refers to listening to and observing what the client is saying, feeling, and doing in addition to an active effort to
understand what is being said and observed. Put simply, the therapist is interested in the client. At level one, the therapist maintains the
dialectical tension of listening and observing on the one hand, while filtering what is seen and heard through the lenses of theory and
previous behaviours of the client, on the other hand. The second level of validation is the accurate reflection of the client's feelings, thoughts,
assumptions and behaviours. It reflects the client’s points and communicates that the therapist is mindful of what is being expressed by the
client. In level three validation, the therapist “reads” the client's behaviour and figures out what the client is feeling, and what he or she is
wishing for or thinking. The therapist conveys an intuitive understanding of the client; sometimes knowing her better than she knows
herself. For example, in Jamie's interaction with her therapist, when she marked her urge to quit therapy as a five, her therapist employed a
level three validation by suggesting that Jamie was upset with her. At level four, validation is based on the notion that behaviour is valid
based on the client’s past; all behaviour is caused and thus, in principle, is understandable. The therapist acknowledges that the client's
behaviour makes perfect sense given his or her experience, physiology and life to date. For example, if a client who was a victim of childhood
sexual abuse expresses discomfort with having a male therapist, the therapist might say, “It makes sense that you would feel that way, given
your childhood experiences.” At level five, the therapist communicates that the client’s behaviour is justifiable, reasonable, well-grounded,


meaningful, and/or efficacious in terms of current events, normal biological functioning, and/or the client's ultimate life goals. The therapist
looks for all the relevant facts in the client's current environment to communicate that the response is understandable. Referring the
previous example, the therapist might use a level five validation by saying, “a man won't understand your experience as well as a woman.”
In level six, the therapist expresses radical genuineness by recognizing the client as he or she is, seeing and responding to his or her strengths,
while maintaining an empathic understanding of the client's difficulties. It is the opposite of treating the client in a condescending manner
or as overly fragile. Finally, a special type of level six validation is cheerleading, where the therapist validates the ability of the client to
overcome difficulties and build a life worth living. The task here is to balance validation of the difficulties of making progress while
simultaneously instilling hope and confidence that the client can change.
Problem solving
Although validation strategies are crucial in DBT, exclusive focus on validation can be as problematic as its absence. Encouraging individuals
who have excruciatingly painful life experiences to accept their current situation offers little solace. Validation and acceptance must be
balanced with problem solving and change. In DBT problem-solving strategies are central to facilitating for change. The process of change is
especially difficult for BPD individuals. Therefore, the therapist needs to master the art of weaving validation strategies into active problem-
solving strategies. DBT divides the problem-solving strategies into a two-stage process. The first focuses on understanding and accepting the
problem at hand, and the second focuses on generating alternate solutions.
Behavioural analysis
When conducting a behavioural analysis, the targets are to identify (1) the problem behaviour, (2) the prompting event that led to the
behaviour, (3) factors that prevent its resolution and (4) factors that may aid solving it.

Conducting a behavioural analysis begins with defining the problem in terms of behaviour and then conducting a moment-to-moment
examination of the chain of events leading up to and following the problematic behaviour. In DBT this is termed a “chain analysis.” The


overall goal of a chain analysis is to determine the function of the problem behaviour. “Behaviour” is used to refer to anything a person does,
public or private, including thinking, feeling and acting. It is helpful to define the problem as a behavioural excess (i.e. unwanted behaviour),
behavioural deficit (i.e. desired or missing behaviour) or faulty stimulus control (i.e. where the behaviour occurs in the wrong situation or
fails to occur in the right situation). Useful questions to ask here are:

1, Are ineffective behaviours being reinforced, and are effective behaviours followed by aversive outcomes?

2. Does the client have the necessary behavioural skills to regulate his or her emotions, respond skilfully to conflict, and manage his or her

own behaviour?

3. Are there patterns of avoidance, or are effective behaviours inhibited by unwarranted fears or guilt?

4, Is the client unaware of the contingencies operating on his or her environment, or are effective behaviours inhibited by faulty beliefs or

assumptions?

A pictorial display of a chain analysis is represented in Figure 27.2. After identifying the problem behaviour, the therapist and client work
to identify the “prompting event" (i.e. a specific environmental event that triggered the problem behaviour). This may be difficult, as clients
are often unable to identify anything in the environment that led to the problem behaviour. Next, the therapist identifies the vulnerability
factors and the relevant “links” in the chain. Vulnerability factors are contextual factors giving prompting events more power (e.g. lack of
sleep, stressful day at work) and links in the chain refer to all the subsequent environmental and behavioural events that occurred between
the prompting event and the problem behaviour. Questions such as “What happened next?” or “How did you get from there to there?” are
often used here. After identifying the relevant links leading up to the problem behaviour, it is important to pinpoint the environmental
and behavioural consequences that are maintaining the problem behaviour. Having a substantial foundation on the principles of learning
is crucial in determining the potential variables that are maintaining or influencing the behaviour (for a review of learning and behaviour


theory, see Pierce & Cheney, 2004). The final step in the behavioural analysis is to develop and test hypotheses about the events that triggered
and maintain the problem behaviour.

Solution analysis

Once the problem has been identified and analyzed, the therapist works with the client to find alternative solutions that will lead to more
adaptive and skilful behaviours. The client’s goals, needs and desires should be in the forefront of the therapist's mind while possible
solutions are generated. Finally, a solution is chosen to implement. Once the client and therapist have agreed upon a solution, they
collaboratively troubleshoot the possible obstacles that are likely to occur when trying to implement the solution. Together, they brainstorm
alternative behaviours or strategies that will surpass the obstacle and lead to the desired goal.

Change procedures

One of the assumptions underlying DBT is that clients are doing the best they can. Thus, dysfunctional solutions to problems in living
require fine-tuning clients’ problem-solving skills. The factors that interfere with effective problem solving include: (1) the behavioural
skill is not in the client's repertoire; (2) the behaviour is too low in his or her response hierarchy; (3) the behaviour is interfered with
by dysfunctional behaviours that are higher in the client's behavioural hierarchy; or (4) the behaviour is inhibited by faulty beliefs and
assumptions or by efforts to avoid unpleasant emotions. The DBT problem-solving procedures outlined next are taken directly from the
cognitive and behavioural treatment literature and are viewed as the primary vehicles of change.


Problem
A = behaviour
Vulnerability =p»
Prompting event , hay 4 wy
Consequences =>
linbe
Figure 27.2 Chain analysis illustration
Skills training
Skills training is called for when a solution requires skills that are not currently in the individual's behavioural repertoire, or when the client
has the necessary skill but cannot integrate its use effectively. Skills training incorporates three procedures: (1) skills acquisition, (2) skills
strengthening and (3) skills generalization. In skills acquisition, the therapist provides didactic instruction to the client on the necessary
skill and then models it. The new skill is strengthened through behavioural rehearsal and natural and arbitrary reinforcement. Finally, skill
generalization occurs through consulting with the client between sessions (e.g. on the phone), providing session tapes for review in vivo,
giving behavioural homework assignments, and changing the environment (e.g. getting family and significant others involved with therapy
groups).


Contingency management

Contingency management requires therapists to organize their behaviour so that adaptive, skilful behaviours of the client are reinforced,
while unskilful or maladaptive behaviours are extinguished or punished. The four strategies used in contingency management are positive
reinforcement, negative reinforcement, extinction and punishment. The general rule is as follows: when the goal is to strengthen the client's
behaviour, a positive consequence is added, or something experienced as aversive is removed. When the goal is to weaken a behaviour,
reinforcers must be withheld, and an aversive experience is maintained. When extinguishing maladaptive behaviours, it is important for
the therapist to find another skilful response to reinforce. The idea here is for the client to “reverse” his or her behavioural hierarchy such
that high-probability maladaptive behaviours become lower in the hierarchy, and low-probability skilful behaviours move higher up in the
hierarchy. When the goal is to suppress a behaviour, an aversive consequence is added (e.g. withdrawing warmth) or a positive consequence
is removed.

Cognitive modification

When adaptive behaviour is inhibited and maladaptive behaviour is facilitated by cognitions and cognitive styles, cognitive modification
procedures are employed. These procedures include contingency clarification and cognitive restructuring. Although the direct cognitive
restructuring procedures (Beck et al., 1979; Ellis, 1962, 1973) are used here, contingency clarification is more commonly used.
In contingency clarification, the therapist clarifies current contingencies (e.g. highlighting consequences as they occur) and future
contingencies by providing realistic information. For example, in the case of Jamie, her therapist highlighted a current contingency by
explaining to Jamie that her parents were reinforcing her dysfunctional behaviour.

Exposure

All of the change procedures in DBT can be conceptualized as exposure strategies. Therapeutic exposure procedures are used informally
throughout stage 1 therapy and formally in stage 2, where the client is systematically exposed to cues of previous traumatic events. Most


of these strategies have been derived from standard exposure principles employed by other treatment researchers (Foa & Kozak, 1986). The
purpose of these strategies is to recondition dysfunctional associations that develop between stimuli (respondent conditioning) or between
a stimulus and a response (operant conditioning). For example, self-harm behaviours may be a result of respondent conditioning (e.g. it is
associated with attention from loved ones) or operant conditioning (e.g. the behaviour is followed by relief). The exposure procedure begins
with orienting the client by reviewing the research on exposure and predicting that the client will feel worse before feeling better. Next,
the therapist provides a non-reinforced exposure and blocks the action tendencies associated with the problem emotion (e.g. lowering eyes
and head when experiencing shame). Finally, the client's control over aversive events is enhanced through opposite action. Opposite action
in DBT refers to identifying the client’s action urge when presented with the relevant cue (e.g. negative emotion prompts urge to avoid/
dissociate), and then practising the opposite action of the urge (e.g. instead of dissociating, the client mindfully experiences the negative
emotion). See the DBT Skills Training Manual for a more detailed description of opposite action (Linehan, 1993b, 2014).

Stylistic strategies

The stylistic strategies in DBT define how to apply core treatment strategies. The DBT therapist balances two quite different styles of
communication: irreverent communication and reciprocal communication. Irreverent communication is similar to the style advocated by
Whitaker (1975) in his writings on strategic therapy, whereas reciprocal communication is similar to the communication style advocated in
client-centred therapy. The two strategies are carefully balanced, with each being woven into a single, stylistic fabric.

Irreverent communication

Irreverent communication refers to reframing the client's communication in an unorthodox, offbeat manner. This stylistic strategy is highly
useful when the client is immovable, or when the therapist and client are “stuck.” It often has an offbeat flavour and uses logic to weave a
web from which the client cannot escape. For instance, if a client says, “I am going to kill myself,” the therapist might reply with, “I thought
you agreed not to drop out of therapy.” Irreverent communication also uses a confrontational tone and, in a sense, calls the client's bluff. For


example, if a client says, “I'm quitting therapy,” the therapist might respond with, “Would you like a referral?” The trick here is to carefully
time the bluff with the simultaneous provision of a safety net, and leave the client a way out.

Reciprocal communication

Responsiveness, self-disclosure, warm engagement, and genuineness are the basic guidelines of reciprocal communication. Self-involving
(disclosure of immediate, personal reactions to the client) and personal self-disclosure (disclosure of facts about the therapist) are both used.
An example of a self-involving self-disclosure is when a therapist responds to a client who consistently shows up late by saying, “When
you show up late, I feel like you are not taking treatment seriously.” When using reciprocal communication, the therapist's responses are
always laced with warmth and genuineness, conveying the message that the therapist and client are both equals within the interpersonal
relationship.

Case management strategies

The therapist moves into case management strategies when there are problems in the client's environment that interfere with his or
her functioning or progress. Case management strategies refer to how the therapist interacts with others about the client. Typically, the
DBT therapist favours teaching clients to interact with others about themselves, but some exceptions are made. Three case management
strategies are used: consultant-to-the-client, consultation-to-the-therapist and environmental intervention.

Consultation-to-the-client

The role of the DBT therapist is to consult to the client on how to manage his or her social/professional network. It is not to consult with the
network about how to manage the client. The therapist does not intervene to adjust environments for the sake of his or her client, nor does
he or she consult with other professionals about how to treat the client unless the client is present. The consultant-to-client strategy is the


preferred case management strategy and perhaps the most innovative aspect of DBT. Its purpose is to help clients learn to manage their own
lives, conveying that they are capable of performing interventions on their own behalf.

Consultation-to-the-therapist

Crisis-generating behaviours and intense emotions of individuals with BPD can make this group extremely difficult to treat. Thus, therapist
supervision and consultation are integral to DBT. From this perspective, therapists apply DBT to the client, and the supervisor and
consultation group apply DBT to the therapist. The overarching purpose of consultation-to-the therapist is to hold the therapist within
the treatment frame, utilizing a dialectical approach of balancing acceptance and change. One of the most difficult aspects of DBT is that
many clients reinforce their therapists for doing ineffective therapy, and punish therapists for doing the treatment effectively. Therefore,
consultation-to-the-therapist balances this out by providing support for applying the treatment effectively.

There are three primary functions of consultation to the therapist. First, the supervisor and consultation team help keep the therapist
in the therapeutic relationship by cheerleading and supporting the therapist. Second, the supervisor or consultation team balances the
therapist in his or her interactions with the client. The team moves close to the therapist, helping him or her maintain a strong position, or
the team may move away from the therapist, which helps the therapist move close to the client to maintain balance. Third, the team provides
the context for the treatment in two forms. In one form, DBT is viewed as a transactional relationship between the community of clients with
BPD and a community of mental health professionals. The overriding essence of the consultation meeting is that the entire team is treating
the client. Another form in which the team provides treatment is by increasing competencies of the therapist. From this perspective, the
team works together to ensure that the therapist is administering the best treatment possible.

Environmental intervention
Although DBT is oriented towards teaching the client how to interact effectively with his or her environment, there are times when
intervention by the therapist is needed. This occurs when the short-term gain is worth the long-term loss in learning. Some examples of


a condition mandating environmental intervention is when the client is unable to act on his or her own behalf and the outcome is very
important, or when the client is a minor.

Integrative strategies for use with specific problems

Linehan et al. (1999) adapted standard DBT for women with BPD and substance dependence (DBT-S). Modifications of the treatment
hierarchy were made such that strategies targeting substance abuse and behaviours functionally related to substance abuse were added. In
addition, attachment strategies were employed in order to keep clients in therapy, and replacement medications were used for individuals
with stimulant or opiate dependence. Findings suggest that DBT-S has been effective in targeting self-harm, abstinence, treatment retention,
social and global adjustment, and state and trait anger.

DBT has also been adapted to treat PTSD more explicitly using prolonged exposure protocols (Foa et al., 2007; Harned, 2013; Harned et al.,
2012, 2014). Within this protocol, once clients’ higher-priority targets are stabilized (ie. life-threatening behaviours and therapy-interfering
behaviours), clients begin prolonged exposure concurrently with standard DBT and engaged in in vivo or imaginal exposure to traumatic
events associated with PTSD symptoms. A preliminary RCT comparing standard DBT with DBT with prolonged exposure indicated the DBT
with prolonged exposure treatment led to greater and more stable reductions in PTSD symptoms, in addition to greater reductions in suicide
attempts, self-injurious behaviours, dissociation and trauma-related guilt cognitions, shame, anxiety and depression (Harned et al., 2014).

DBT has also been modified for eating disorders. Wiser and Telch (1999) adapted standard DBT to treat eating disordered populations by
conceptualizing binge-eating behaviours as a maladaptive, yet momentarily effective method of emotion regulation and distress tolerance.
Therefore, treatment for binge-eating disorder (BED) modifies DBT treatment to include mindfulness, emotion regulation, and distress
tolerance skills to equip these individuals with the skills needed when they experience the urge to binge. A recent emergence of studies
investigating the efficacy of DBT for BED suggest that DBT is effective in reducing binge eating and eating pathology (Telch et al., 2000, 2001).
Hill et al. (2011) conducted a 12-week “appetite-focused” DBT treatment for individuals with bulimia nervosa (BN) wherein clients were


trained to increase awareness of fluctuations in their appetite compared to a waitlist control. These authors found that the active treatment
resulted in significantly greater reductions in bulimia nervosa symptoms and higher remission rates. Another study compared 20 weeks of
DBT informed treatment for BN to a waitlist control and similarly found that the active treatment resulted in greater reductions in binge/
purge behaviours (Safer et al., 2001). Last, there is some emerging evidence that DBT can be adapted to treat anorexia nervosa (AN). Radically
open-DBT is a modified form of DBT for the treatment of AN that focuses on emotional loneliness as the core problem underpinning AN,
rather than emotion dysregulation (Lynch et al., 2013). Radically open-DBT is described in Chapter 28 of this volume. A preliminary pre-post
examination of this adaptation suggests that it results in significant increases in body mass index, AN remission rates and eating disorder-
related quality of life, as well as reductions in eating disorder-related psychopathology symptoms and psychological distress (Lynch et al.,
2013).

Summary

BPD is characterized by severe cognitive, behavioural, and emotion dysregulation. The prevalence of BPD in the general population is
between 2% and 6%. In mental health services individuals with BPD constitute 30% of psychiatric inpatients and 22% of outpatients.
Genetic factors and adverse and invalidating early environments are implicated in the aetiology of BPD. Structural and functional
neurobiological abnormalities are associated with DBT. These include dysregulation of the serotonergic, noradrenergic and dopaminergic
neurotransmission systems; reduced hippocampal and amygdala volumes; hyperreactivity of the amygdala; reduced activity in the
prefrontal cortex; reduced vagal tone; and heightened negative emotional arousal at baseline. Some studies indicate that most cases remit
within 10 years, while others show that for most individuals, BDP runs a chronic course. BPD is commonly comorbid with a variety of
psychological diagnoses, most notably substance misuse, panic disorder, eating disorders, PTSD, major depressive disorder, and other PDs.
Traditional outpatient psychiatric services do not meet the needs of patients with BPD well. While there is some empirical support for the


use of pharmacological interventions to control some symptoms of BPD, there is no single pharmacological intervention that effectively
targets the core deficits in BPD. There is empirical support for four psychological treatments for BPD: DBT, mentalization based therapy,
transference focused therapy and schema-focused therapy. Of these, there is greatest support for DBT. DBT is a comprehensive, staged
approach to treatment of BPD based on a biosocial model of this condition. DBT incorporates a unique blend of Eastern teachings to promote
acceptance with behavioural principles used to promote change. It embodies a dialectical philosophy, reflecting a transactional process
between inherent opposites, where resolution is borne out of a synthesis of both positions. From a dialectical perspective, the therapeutic
relationship is the context in which a more accurate world view and resulting set of behaviours is fostered. DBT emphasizes the interplay
between extensive validation and problem-solving techniques, and provides explicit guidelines and formal targeting strategies to yield a
structured treatment package for both the client and the therapist. To date, there is a growing body of research providing empirical support
for the effectiveness of DBT in BPD and, more recently, for other disorders.
Exercises
Using the example of Jamie in the chapter or a client with whom you are familiar, divide into groups of three. Assign roles of clinical
psychologist, client and observer.
1, Pick two therapeutic strategies of potential benefit to your client from the description of DBT, for example validation, problem solving
or behavioural analysis. Role-play a 10-minute section of the session where you try to use the strategies with the client.
2. Pick two skills that may be of use to the client and role-play a 10-minute part of the session where the therapist works with the client on
skills acquisition, skills strengthening or skills generalization.
3. After each role-play, exchange feedback and ask the observer for feedback. Be encouraging and respectful of your colleagues and offer
constructive suggestions,


Further reading for practitioners
Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-Behavioural Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford Press.
Linehan, M. M. (2014), DBT Skills Training Manual (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.
Linehan, M. M. (2014). DBT Skills Training Handouts and Worksheets (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.

Further reading for clients and family members
Bell, L. (2003). Managing Intense Emotions and Overcoming Self-Destructive Habits: A Self-Help Guide. New York: Routledge.
Friedel, R. O. (2004). Borderline Personality Disorder Demystified: An Essential Guide For Understanding and Living With BPD. New York:
Marlowe.
Manning, S. (2011). Loving Someone with Borderline Personality Disorder: How to Keep Out of Control Emotions from Destroying Your
Relationships. New York: Guilford.
McKay, M., Wood, J. C., & Brantley, J. (2007). The Dialectical Behaviour Therapy Skills Workbook: Practical DBT Exercises for Learning
Mindfulness, Interpersonal Effectiveness, Emotion Regulation and Distress Tolerance. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
Van Gelder, K. (2010). The Buddha and the Borderline: My Recovery from Borderline Personality Disorder Through Dialectical Behaviour
Therapy, Buddhism, and On-Line Dating. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.


Evidence summaries
Lieb, K., Vollm, B., Rucker, G.. Timmer, A. & Stoffers, J. M. (2010). Pharmacotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Cochrane
systematic review of randomised trials. The British journal of Psychiatry, 196, 4-12.
Lynch, T.R., Trost, W. T., Salsman, N., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical behaviour therapy for borderline personality disorder. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 3, 181-205.
Panos, P. T., Jackson, J. W., Hasan, O., & Panos, A. (2014). Meta-analysis and systematic review assessing the efficacy of dialectical
behaviour therapy (DBT). Research on Social Work Practice, 24(2), 213-223.
Sneed, |. Fertuck, E., Kanellopoulos, D., & Culang-Reinlieb, M, (2012). Borderline personality disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.),
Handbook of Evidence-Based Practice in Clinical Psychology. Volume Il, Adult Disorders (pp. 507-529). Chichester: Wiley.

References
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1980). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition (DSM-IIi). Arlington,
VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV).
Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-
IV-TR). Arlington, VA: Author.


American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Baird, A. A., Veague, H. B., & Rabbitt, C. E. (2005). Developmental precipitants of borderline personality disorder. Development and
Psychopathology, 17, 1031-1049.

Bales, D., van Beek, N., Smits, M., Willemsen, S., Busschbach, J.J.V., Verheul, R., & Andrea, H. (2012). Treatment outcome of 18-month,
day hospital mentalization-based treatment (MBT) in patients with severe borderline personality disorder in the Netherlands. journal of
Personality Disorders, 26, 568.

Bandelow, B., Schmahl, C., Falkai, P., & Wedekind, D. (2010). Borderline personality disorder: A dysregulation of the endogenous opioid
system? Psychological Review, 117, 623-636.

Barnicot, K., Katsakou, C., Marougka, S., & Priebe, S. (2011). Treatment completion in psychotherapy for borderline personality disorder:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 123, 327-338.

Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2006). Mentalization-Based Treatment For Borderline Personality Disorder: A Practical Guide. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.

Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2008). Mentalization-based treatment for BPD. Social Work in Mental Health, 6, 187-201.

Bateman, A. W., & Fonagy, P. (2009). Randomized controlled trial of outpatient mentalization-based treatment versus structured clinical
management for borderline personality disorder. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 1355.

Beauchaine, T. (2001). Vagal tone, development, and Gray’s motivational theory: Toward an integrated model of autonomic nervous
system functioning in psychopathology. Developmental Psychopathology, 13, 183-214.

Beck, A. T,, Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive Therapy of Depression. New York: Guilford Press.

Becker, D. F., Grilo, C. M., Edell, W. S., & McGlashan, T. H. (2000). Comorbidity of borderline personality disorder with other personality
disorders in hospitalized adolescents and adults. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 2011-2016.


Bender, D. S., Gunderson, J. G., Dolan, R. T., Skodol, A. E., Sanislow, C. A., Dyck, I. R., ... Oldham, J. M. (2001). Treatment utilization by
patients with personality disorders. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 295-302.

Bierer, L. M., Yehuda, R., Schmeidler, J, Mitropoulou, V., New, A. S., Silverman, J. M., & Seiver, L. J. (2003). Abuse and neglect in childhood:
Relationship to personality disorder diagnoses. CNS Spectrums, 8, 737-54.

Clarkin, J. F., Foelsch, P. A., & Levy, K. N. (2001). The development of psychodynamic treatment for patients with borderline personality
disorder: A preliminary study of behavioural change. Journal of Personality Disorders, 15,487.

Clarkin, J. F., Levy, K. N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kernberg, O. F. (2007). Evaluating three treatments for borderline personality disorder: A
multiwave study. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 922-928

Coan, J. A. (2008). Toward a neuroscience of attachment. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of Attachment (Second Edition, pp.
241-265). New York: Guilford.

Courtet, P., Baud, P., Abbar, M., Boulenger, J. P., Castelnau, D., Mouthon, D., ... Buresi, C. (2001). Association between violent suicidal
behaviour and the low activity allele of the serotonin transporter gene. Molecular Psychiatry, 6, 338-341

Courtet, P., Malafosse, A., Picot, M., Bellivier, F., Torres, S., Jollant, F., ... Buresi, C. (2004). Serotonin transporter gene may be involved in
short-term risk of subsequent suicide attempts. Biological Psychiatry, 55, 46-51.

Davidson, G., Devaney, J., & Spratt, T. (2010). The impact of adversity in childhood on outcomes in adulthood: Research lessons and
limitations. Journal of Social Work, 10, 369-390.

Davidson, R. J., Jackson, D. C., & Kalin, N. H. (2000). Emotion, plasticity, context, and regulation: Perspectives from affective
neuroscience. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 890-909.

de-Almeida, C. P., Wenzel, A., de-Carvalho, C. S., Powell, V. B., Araujo-Neto, C., Quarantini, L. C., & de-Oliveira, I. R. (2012). Amygdalar
volume in borderline personality disorder with and without comorbid post-traumatic stress disorder: A meta-analysis. CNS Spectrums,
17, 70-75.


De Panfilis, C., Politi, V., Fortunati, R., Cazzolla, R., Scaramuzzino, M., Marchesi, C., & Maggini, C. (2011). Two-year follow-up of borderline
personality disorder patients in Italy: A preliminary report on prognosis and prediction of outcome. International journal of Social
Psychiatry, 57, 528-537.

Distel, M. A., Trull, T. J., Derom, C. A., Thiery, E. W., Grimmer, M. A., Martin, N. G., ... Boomsma, D. I. (2008). Heritability of borderline
personality disorder features is similar across three countries. Psychological Medicine, 38, 1219-1229.

Doering, S., Hérz, S., Rentrop, M., Fischer-Kern, M., Schuster, P., Benecke, C., ... Buchheim, P. (2010). Transference-focused psychotherapy
v. treatment by community psychotherapists for borderline personality disorder: Randomised controlled trial. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 196, 389-395.

Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and Emotion in Psychotherapy. New York: Lyle Stuart.

Ellis, A. (1973). Humanistic Psychotherapy: The Rational-Emotive Approach. New York: Julian Press.

Etkin, A., Egner, T., & Kalisch, R. (2011). Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 15, 85-93.

Farrell, J. M., Shaw, |. A., & Webber, M. A. (2009). A schema-focused approach to group psychotherapy for outpatients with borderline
personality disorder: A randomized controlled trial. journal of Behaviour Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 40, 317-328.

Feliu-Soler, A., Pascual, J. C., Soler, J., Pérez, V., Armario, A., Carrasco, J., ... Borras, X. (2013). Emotional responses to a negative emotion
induction procedure in borderline personality disorder. International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology, 13, 9-17

First, M. B., Gibbon, M., Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J.B.W., Benjamin, L. S. (1997). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis Ii Personality
Disorders (SCID-II). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., & Rothbaum, B. O. (2007). Prolonged Exposure Therapy For PTSD: Emotional Processing Of Traumatic Experiences:
Therapist Guide. New York: Oxford University Press.

Foa, E. B., & Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective information. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 20-35.


Fonagy, P., Target, M., Gergely, G., Allen, J., & Bateman, A. (2003). The developmental roots of borderline personality disorder in early
attachment relationships: A theory and some evidence. Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 23, 412-459.

Friedel, R. 0. (2004). Dopamine dysfunction in borderline personality disorder: A hypothesis. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29, 1029-1039.
Fruzzetti, A. E. (1997). Causes and consequences: individual distress in the context of couple interactions. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 64, 1192-201.

Fruzzetti, A. E., & Iverson, K. M. (2006). Intervening with couples and families to treat emotion dysregulation and psychopathology.
In D. K. Snyder & J. N. Hughes (Eds.), Emotion Regulation in Couples and Families: Pathways to Dysfunction and Health (pp. 249-267).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Fruzzetti, A. E., Santisteban, D. A., & Hoffman, P. D. (2007). Dialectical behaviour therapy with families. In L. A. Dimeff & K. Koerner
(Eds.), Dialectical Behaviour Therapy in Clinical Practice: Applications Across Disorders And Settings (pp. 222-244). New York: Guilford.
Giesen-Bloo, J., van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., ... Arntz, A. (2006). Outpatient psychotherapy for
borderline personality disorder: Randomized trial of schema-focused therapy versus transference-focused psychotherapy. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 63, 649-658.

Glick, I, Dulit, R., Wachter, E., & Clarkin, J. (1995). The family, family therapy, and borderline personality disorder. The Journal of
Psychotherapy Practice and Research, 4, 237-246.

Gonda, X., Rihmer, Z., Zsombok, T., Bagdy, G., Akiskal, K. K., & Akiskal, H. S. (2006). The SHTTLPR polymorphism of the serotonin
transporter gene is associated with affective temperaments as measured by TEMPS-A. Journal of Affective Disorders, 91, 125-131
Goodman, M., Triebwasser, J., & New, A. (2008). Biological underpinnings of borderline personality disorder. Social Work in Mental
Health, 6, 33-47.


Grant, B. F, Pickering, R. P., Ruan, W. J., Chou, S. P., Goldstein, R. B., Huang, B., ... Pulay, A. J. (2008). Prevalence, correlates, disability, and
comorbidity of DSM-IV borderline personality disorder: Results from the wave 2 national epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related
conditions. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 533-545

Grosjean, B., & Tsai, G. E. (2007). NMDA neurotransmission as a critical mediator of borderline personality disorder. journal of Psychiatry
& Neuroscience, 32, 103-115.

Gunderson, J. (1989). Borderline personality disorder. In American Psychiatric Association (Ed.), Treatments of Psychiatric Disorders: A
Task Force Report of the American Psychiatric Association (pp. 2749-2759). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Gunderson, J. G., Zanarini, M. C., Choi-Kain, L. W., Mitchell, K. S., Jang, K. L., & Hudson, J. I. (2011). Family study of borderline personality
disorder and its sectors of psychopathology. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 753-762.

Gurvits, I. G., Koenigsberg, H. W., Siever, L. J. (2000). Neurotransmitter dysfunction in patients with borderline personality disorder.
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 23, 27-40.

Hall, J., Olabi, B., Lawrie, S. M.,& McIntosh, A. M. (2010). Hippocampal and amygdala volumes in borderline personality disorder: A meta-
analysis of magnetic resonance imaging studies. Personality and Mental Health, 4, 172-179.

Hallahan, B., Hibbeln, J. R., Davis, J. M., Garland, M. R. (2007). Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in patients with recurrent self-harm:
Single-centre double-blind randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 118-122.

Harned, M. S. (2013). Treatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Comorbid Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Springer Science
+ Business Media.

Harned, M. S., Korslund, K. E., Foa, E. B., & Linehan, M. M. (2012). Treating PTSD in suicidal and self-injuring women with borderline
personality disorder: Development and preliminary evaluation of a dialectical behaviour therapy prolonged exposure protocol.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50, 381-386.


Harned, M. S., Korslund, K. E., & Linehan, M. M. (2014). A pilot randomized controlled trial of dialectical behaviour therapy with
and without the dialectical behaviour therapy prolonged exposure protocol for suicidal and self-injuring women with borderline
personality disorder and PTSD. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 55, 7.

Hill, D. M., Craighead, L. W., & Safer, D. L. (2011). Appetite-focused dialectical behaviour therapy for the treatment of binge eating with
purging: A preliminary trial. The International Journal of Eating Disorders, 44, 249-261

Hoffman, P. D., Fruzzetti, A. E., Buteau, E., Neiditch, E. R., Penney, D., Bruce, M.L., ... Struening, E. (2005). Family connections: A program
for relatives of persons with borderline personality disorder. Family Process, 44, 217-225.

Hopwood, C. J., Gunderson, J. G., Zanarini, M. C., Skodol, A. E., Morey, L. C., Grilo, C. M., ... Daversa, M. T. (2008). A comparison of interview
and self-report methods for the assessment of borderline personality disorder criteria. Psychological Assessment, 20, 81-85

Hughes, A. E., Crowell, S. E., Uyeji, L., & Coan, J. A. (2012). A developmental neuroscience of borderline pathology: Emotion dysregulation
and social baseline theory. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 40, 21-33.

Jorgensen, C. R., Freund, C., Baye, R., Jordet, H., Andersen, D., & Kjelbye, M. (2013). Outcome of mentalization-based and supportive
psychotherapy in patients with borderline personality disorder: A randomized trial. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 127, 305-317.
Kaye, A., & Shea, M. (2000). Personality disorders, personality traits, and defence mechanisms. In Task Force for the Handbook of
Psychiatric Measures (Ed.), Handbook of Psychiatric Measures (pp. 713-749). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Kendler, K. S., Aggen, S. H., Czajkowski, N., Raysamb, E., Tambs, K., Torgersen, S., ... Reichborn-Kjennerud, T. (2008). The structure of
genetic and environmental risk factors for DSM-IV personality disorders: A multivariate twin study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65,
1438-1446.

Kernberg, O. (1984). Severe Personality Disorders: Psychotherapeutic Strategies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Kernberg, O. F., Selzer, M. A., Koenigsberg, H. W., Carr, A.C., Appelbaum, A. H. (1989). Psychodynamic Psychotherapy Of Borderline Patients.
New York: Basic Books.


Korzekwa, M. L,, Dell, P. F., Links, P. S., Thabane, L., & Webb, S. P. (2008). Estimating the prevalence of borderline personality disorder in
psychiatric outpatients using a two-phase procedure. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 49, 380-386.

Krause-Utz, A., Winter, D., Niedtfeld, I., & Schmahl, C. (2014). The latest neuroimaging findings in borderline personality disorder.
Current Psychiatry Reports, 16, 438.

Kuo, J. R. & Linehan, M. M. (2009). Disentangling emotion processes in borderline personality disorder: Physiological and self-
reported assessment of biological vulnerability, baseline intensity, and reactivity to emotionally evocative stimuli. journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 118, 531-544.

Leichsenring, F., Leibing, E., Kruse, J., New, A. S., & Leweke, F. (2011). Borderline personality disorder. The Lancet, 377, 74-84.

Leontieva, L., & Gregory, R. (2013). Characteristics of patients with borderline personality disorder in a state psychiatric hospital. journal
of Personality Disorders, 27,222.

Lesch, K. P., & Merschdorf, U. (2000). Impulsivity, aggression, and serotonin: A molecular psychobiological perspective. Behavioural
Sciences & the Law, 18, 581-604.

Levitt, H., Korman, Y., Angus, L. (2000). A metaphor analysis in treatments of depression: Metaphor as a marker of change. Counselling
Psychology Quarterly, 13, 23-35.

Levy, K. N. (2005). The implications of attachment theory and research for understanding borderline personality disorder. Development
and Psychopathology, 17, 959-986.

Lieb, K., Véllm, B., Ricker, G., Timmer, A., & Stoffers, J. M. (2010). Pharmacotherapy for borderline personality disorder: Cochrane
systematic review of randomised trials. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 196, 4-12.

Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-Behavioural Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford Press.

Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills Training Manual For Treating Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford Press.

Linehan, M. M. (2014). DBT Skills Training Manual (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.


Linehan, M. M., Dimeff, L. A., Reynolds, S. K., Comtois, K. A., Welch, S. S., Heagerty, P., & Kivlahan, D. R. (2002). Dialectical behaviour
therapy versus comprehensive validation therapy plus 12-step for the treatment of opioid dependent women meeting criteria for
borderline personality disorder. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 67, 13-26.

Linehan, M., Schmidt, H., Dimeff, L., Craft, J., Kanter, J., & Comtois, K. (1999): Dialectical behaviour therapy for patients with borderline
personality disorder and drug-dependence. American Journal on Addictions, 8, 279-292.

Loew, T. H., Tritt, K., Bachler, E., Mitterlehner, F., Pedrosa Gil, F., Leiberich, P., ... Buschmann, W. (2006). Topiramate treatment for women
with borderline personality disorder: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 26, 61-66.
Loranger, A. W.,, Sartorius, N., Andreoli, A., Berger, P., Buchheim, P., Channabasavanna, S. M., ... Regier, D. A. (1994). The international
personality disorder examination: The world health organization/alcohol, drug abuse, and mental health administration international
pilot study of personality disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 215-224.

Lynch, T. R., Gray, K.L.H., Hempel, R. J., Titley, M., Chen, E. Y., & O'Mahen, H. A. (2013). Radically open-dialectical behaviour therapy for
adult anorexia nervosa: Feasibility and outcomes from an inpatient program. BMC Psychiatry, 13, 293-293.

Lynch, T. R., Trost, W. T., Salsman, N., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical behaviour therapy for borderline personality disorder. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 3, 181-205

Mauchnik, J., & Schmahl, C. (2010). The latest neuroimaging findings in borderline personality disorder. Current Psychiatry Reports, 12,
46-55

Maurex, L., Zaboli, G., Ohman, A., Asberg, M., Leopardi, R. (2010). The serotonin transporter gene polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and
affective symptoms among women diagnosed with borderline personality disorder. European Psychiatry, 25, 19-25.

McGlashan, T. H., Bender, D., Stout, R. L., Yen, S., Pagano, M., Grilo, C. M,, ... Zanarini, M. C. (2005). Two-year prevalence and stability
of individual DSM-IV criteria for schizotypal, borderline, avoidant, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders: Toward a hybrid
model of axis II disorders. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 883-889.


McMain, S., Korman, L., & Dimeff, L. (2001). Dialectical behaviour therapy and the treatment of emotion dysregulation. In Session:
Psychotherapy in Practice, 57, 183-196

McMain, S. F., Links, P. S., Gnam, W. H., Guimond, T,, Cardish, R. J., Korman, L., & Streiner, D. L. (2009). A randomized trial of dialectical
behaviour therapy versus general psychiatric management for borderline personality disorder. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 166,
1365-1374.

Neacsiu, A. D., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Dialectical behaviour therapy skills use as a mediator and outcome of treatment for
borderline personality disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 832-839.

New, A. S., Flory, J., Siever, L. J., Hazlett, E. A., Buchsbaum, M. S., Goodman, M., ... Koenigsberg, H. W. (2007). Amygdala-prefrontal
disconnection in borderline personality disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 32, 1629-1640.

Ni, X., Chan, K., Bulgin, N., Sicard, T., Bismil, R., McMain, S., & Kennedy, J. L. (2006). Association between serotonin transporter gene and
borderline personality disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40, 448-453.

NICE. (2009). Borderline Personality Disorder: Treatment and Management (Clinical guideline 78). London: Author.

Nickel, M. K., Egger, C., Anvar, J, Rother, W. K., Loew, T. H., Kaplan, P,, ... Fartacek, R. (2006). Aripiprazole in the treatment of patients with
borderline personality disorder: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 833-838.

Nickel, M. K., Loew, T. H., & Pedrosa Gil, F. (2007). Aripiprazole in treatment of borderline patients, part II: An 18-month follow-up.
Psychopharmacology, 191, 1023-1026.

Nickel, M. K., Nickel, C., Kaplan, P., Lahmann, C., Muhlbacher, M., Tritt, K.,... Loew, T. H. (2005). Treatment of aggression with topiramate
in male borderline patients: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 495-499.

Nickel, M. K., Nickel, C., Mitterlehner, F. O., Tritt, K., Lahmann, C., Leiberich, P.K., ... Loew, T. H. (2004). Topiramate treatment of
aggression in female borderline personality disorder patients: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65,
1515-1519.


Nunes, P. M., Wenzel, A., Borges, K. T., Porto, C. R., Caminha, R. M., & de Oliveira, I. R. (2009). Volumes of the hippocampus and amygdala
in patients with borderline personality disorder: A meta-analysis. Journal of Personality Disorders, 23, 333-345.

Nysaeter, T. E., & Nordahl, H. M. (2012). Comorbidity of borderline personality disorder with other personality disorders in psychiatric
outpatients: How does it look at 2-year follow-up? Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 66, 209

O'Neill, A., & Frodl, T. (2012). Brain structure and function in borderline personality disorder. Brain Structure and Function, 217, 767-
782.

Paris, J., & Zweig-Frank, H. (2001). A 27-year follow-up of patients with borderline personality disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 42,
482-487.

Paris, J., Zweig-Frank, H., Kin, N.M.K., Ng Ying, Schwartz, G., Steiger, H., & Nair, N.P-V. (2004). Neurobiological correlates of diagnosis and
underlying traits in patients with borderline personality disorder compared with normal controls. Psychiatry Research, 121, 239-252.
Perry, J., Herman, J., van der Kolk, B., & Hoke, L. (1990). Psychotherapy and psychological trauma in borderline personality disorder.
Psychiatric Annals, 20, 33-43.

Pfohl, B., Blum, N., & Zimmerman, M. (1997). Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Phelps, E. A., & LeDoux, J. E. (2005). Contributions of the amygdala to emotion processing: From animal models to human behaviour.
Neuron, 48, 175-187.

Pierce, W. D., & Cheney, C. D. (2004). Behaviour Analysis And Learning. Mahwah, NL: L. Erlbaum Associates.

Porges, S. W., Doussard-Roosevelt, J. A., & Maiti, A. K. (1994). Vagal tone and the physiological regulation of emotion. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 59, 167-186.

Rascati, J. (1990). Managed care and the discharge dilemma: Commentary. Psychiatry, 53, 124-126.

Rasmussen, B. (2000). Poetic truths and clinical reality: Client experiences of the use of metaphor by therapists. Smith College Studies in
Social Work, 70, 2, 355-373.


Rodrigues, E., Wenzel, A., Ribeiro, M. P., Quarantini, L. C., Miranda-Scippa, A., de Sena, E. P., & de Oliveira, I. R. (2011). Hippocampal
volume in borderline personality disorder with and without comorbid posttraumatic stress disorder: A meta-analysis. European
Psychiatry, 26, 452-456.

Ruocco, A. C., Amirthavasagam, S., & Zakzanis, K. K. (2012). Amygdala and hippocampal volume reductions as candidate
endophenotypes for borderline personality disorder: A meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging studies. Psychiatry Research:
Neuroimaging, 201, 245-252

Safer, D.L., Telch, C. F.,, & Agras, W. S. (2001). Dialectical behaviour therapy adapted for bulimia: A case report. The International Journal
of Eating Disorders, 30, 101-106.

Saposnek, D. T. (1980). Aikido: A model for brief strategic therapy. Family Process, 19, 227-238.

Schmahl, C. G., & Bohus, M. (2001). Symptomorientierte Pharmakotherapie bei Borderline- Personlichkeitsstorung. Fortschritte der
Neurologie Psychiatrie, 69, 310-321.

Scott, L. N., Levy, K. N., & Granger, D. A. (2013). Biobehavioural reactivity to social evaluative stress in women with borderline
personality disorder. Personality Disorders, 4,91-100.

Silk, K. R.,, Lee, S., Hill, E. M., & Lohr, N. E. (1995). Borderline personality disorder symptoms and severity of sexual abuse. The American
Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1059-1064.

Simpson, J. A., & Weiner, E. S. (1989). Oxford English Dictionary (Second Edition) [On-Line]. University of Washington Information
Navigator.

Skodol, A., Buckley, P., & Charles, E. (1983). Is there a characteristic pattern to the treatment history of clinic outpatients with borderline
personality? Journal of Nervous & Mental Diseases, 171, 405-410.


Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G., McGlashan, T. H., Dyck, I. R., Stout, R. L., Bender, D.S., ... Oldham, J. M. (2002c). Functional impairment in
patients with schizotypal, borderline, avoidant, or obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 276-
283.

Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J., Pfohl, B., Widiger, T., & Livesley, J, & Siever, L. (2002b). The borderline diagnosis I: Psychopathology,
Comorbidity, and Personality Structure. Biological Psychiatry, 51,936-950.

Skodol, A. E., Siever, L. J., Livesley, W. J, Gunderson, J. G., Pfohl, B., & Widiger, T. A. (2002a). The borderline diagnosis II: Biology, genetics,
and clinical course. Biological Psychiatry, 51,951-963.

Sneed, J., Fertuck, E., Kanellopoulos, D., & Culang-Reinlieb, M. (2012). Borderline personality disorder. In P. Sturmey & M. Hersen (Eds.),
Handbook of Evidence-Based Practice in Clinical Psychology. Volume II, Adult Disorders (pp. 507-529). Chichester: Wiley.

Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Tiana, T., Cebria, A., Barrachina, J., Campins, M. J., ... Pérez, V. (2009). Dialectical behaviour therapy skills training
compared to standard group therapy in borderline personality disorder: A 3-month randomised controlled clinical trial. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 47, 353-358

Soloff, P. H. (2000). Psychopharmacology of borderline personality disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 23, 169-92.

Soloff, P. H., Cornelius, J., George, A., Nathan, S., Perel, J. M., & Ulrich, R. F. (1993). Efficacy of phenelzine and haloperidol in borderline
personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 377-385.

Soloff, P. H., George, A., Nathan, S., Schulz, P. M., Cornelius, J. R., Herring, J., & Perel, J. M. (1989). Amitriptyline versus haloperidol in
borderlines: Final outcomes and predictors of response. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 9, 238-246.

Soloff, P.H., Lynch, K. G., & Kelly, T. M. (2002). Childhood abuse as a risk factor for suicidal behaviour in borderline personality disorder.
Journal of Personality Disorders, 16, 201-214.

Stanley, B., & Siever, L. J. (2010). The interpersonal dimension of borderline personality disorder: Toward a neuropeptide model. The
American Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 24-39.


Stone, M., Hurt, S., & Stone, D. (1987). The PI 500: Long-term follow-up of borderline inpatients meeting DSM-III criteria. I: Global
outcome. Journal of Personality Disorders, 1, 291-298.

Swigar, M. E., Astrachan, B. M., Levine, M. A., Mayfield, V., & Radovich, C. (1991). Single and repeated admissions to a mental health
centre. The International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 37, 259-266.

Tadic, A., Wagner, S., Hoch, J., Bagkaya, 6., von Cube, R., Skaletz, C., ... Dahmen, N. (2009). Gender differences in axis I and axis II
comorbidity in patients with borderline personality disorder. Psychopathology, 42, 257

Telch, C., Agras, W., & Linehan, M. (2000). Group dialectical behaviour therapy for binge-eating disorder: A preliminary, uncontrolled
trial. Behaviour Therapy, 31, 569-582.

Telch, C., Agras, W., & Linehan, M. (2001). Dialectical behaviour therapy for binge eating disorder. Journal of Consulting & Clinical
Psychology, 69, 1061-1065

Torgersen, S., Czajkowski, N., Jacobson, K., Reichborn-Kjennerud, T., Reysamb, E., Neale, M., ... Kendler, K. (2008). Dimensional
representations of DSM-IV cluster B personality disorders in a population-based sample of Norwegian twins: A multivariate study.
Psychological Medicine, 38, 1617-1625.

Torgersen, S., Lygren, S., Per, A., et al. (2000). A twin study of personality disorders. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 42, US-425.

Tritt, K., Nickel, C., Lahmann, C., Leiberich, P. K., Rother, W. K., Loew, T. H., & Nickel, M. K. (2005). Lamotrigine treatment of aggression
in female borderline-patients: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 19, 287-291.
Tyrer, P. (2000). Quick Personality Assessment Schedule: PAS-Q. In P. Tyrer (Ed.), Personality Disorders: Management and Course (Second
Edition, pp. 181-190). London: Arnold

Whitaker, C. (1975). Psychotherapy of the absurd: With special emphasis on the psychotherapy of aggression. Family Process, 14, 1-16.
Widiger, T. A., Mangine, S., Corbitt, E. M. (1995). Personality Disorder Interview-IV: A Semistructured Interview of Personality Disorders.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.


Widom, C. S., Czaja, S. J., & Paris, J. (2009). A prospective investigation of borderline personality disorder in abused and neglected children
followed up into adulthood. Journal of Personality Disorders, 23, 433-446.

Wiser, S., & Telch, C. (1999). Dialectical behaviour therapy for binge-eating disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 55, 755-768.

World Health Organization (WHO). (1992). The ICD- 10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Diagnostic Criteria for Research.
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema Therapy: A Practitioner's Guide. New York: Guilford Press.

Zanarini, M. C. (2003). Zanarini rating scale for borderline personality disorder (ZAN-BPD): A continuous measure of DSM-IV borderline
psychopathology. Journal of Personality Disorders, 17, 233-242.

Zanarini, M. C., & Frankenburg, F. R. (1997). Pathways to the development of borderline personality disorder. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 11,93-104

Zanarini, M. C., & Frankenburg, F. R. (2001). Olanzapine treatment of female borderline personality disorder patients: A double-blind,
placebo-controlled pilot study. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 849-854

Zanarini, M. C., & Frankenburg, F. R. (2003). Omega-3 fatty acid treatment of women with borderline personality disorder: A double-
blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 167-169.

Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Chauncey, D. L., & Gunderson, J. G. (1987). The diagnostic interview for personality disorders:
Interrater and test-retest reliability. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 28, 467-480.

Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Hennen, J., Reich, D. B., & Silk, K. R. (2004a). Axis I comorbidity in patients with borderline personality
disorder: 6-year follow-up and prediction of time to remission. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 2108-2114.

Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Hennen, J., Reich, D. B., & Silk, K. R. (2006). Prediction of the 10-year course of borderline personality
disorder. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 827-832.


Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Khera, G., Bleichmar, J. (2001). Treatment histories of borderline inpatients. Comprehensive Psychiatry,
42, 144-150.

Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., & Parachini, E. A. (2004b). A preliminary, randomized trial of fluoxetine, olanzapine, and the
olanzapine-fluoxetine combination in women with borderline personality disorder. The journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 65, 903-907.
Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., & Fitzmaurice, G. (2010). The 10-year course of psychosocial functioning among patients
with borderline personality disorder and axis II comparison subjects: Psychosocial functioning of patients with BPD. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 122, 103-109.

Zanarini, M. C., & Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., & Marino, M. F. (2000). Biparental failure in the childhood experience of borderline
patients. Journal of Personality Disorders, 14, 264.

Zanarini, M. C., Gunderson, J. G., Frankenburg, F. R., & Chauncey, D. L. (1989). The revised diagnostic interview for borderlines:
Discriminating BPD from other axis II disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 3, 10-18.

Zanarini, M., Vujanovic, A., Parachini, E., Boulanger, J., Frankenburg, F., & Hennen, J. (2003). A screening measure for BPD: The Mclean
Screening Instrument for Borderline Personality Disorder (MSI-BPD). Journal of Personality Disorders, 17, 568-573.


Chapter 28 Radically open-dialectical behaviour therapy for overcontrolled disorders
Including refractory depression, anorexia nervosa and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
Thomas R. Lynch, Dionysis Seretis and Roelie Hempel

DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-28
Introduction
Radically open-dialectical behaviour therapy (RO-DBT) is a new transdiagnostic evidence-based treatment approach targeting a spectrum
of disorders characterized by excessive inhibitory control or overcontrol (OC). The treatment is intended for clinicians struggling to treat
patients with chronic problems such as refractory depression, anorexia nervosa and obsessive- compulsive personality disorder. The
term ‘radical openness’ represents the confluence of three capacities involved in emotional well-being: openness, flexibility and social
connectedness. Radical openness is the core philosophical principle and core skill in RO-DBT.

RO-DBT is informed by 20+ years of treatment development research using a translational approach. Top-down theory and bottom-up
clinical/experimental findings have been integrated in order to develop a comprehensive treatment manual (Lynch, in press). The efficacy of
RO-DBT is supported by two randomized controlled trials (RCTs) targeting refractory depression and comorbid personality disorders (Lynch
et al., 2003, 2007), one non-randomized trial targeting treatment-resistant OC adults (Keogh, Booth, & Baird, in preparation), and two open-
trials targeting adult anorexia nervosa (Chen et al., 2015; Lynch et al., 2013). The mechanisms of change and efficacy for treatment of
refractory depression and comorbid OC personality disorders are being investigated via a large multisite RCT (Lynch, 2014).


We organize this chapter by (1) defining OC, (2) providing an overview of its relationship with various diagnoses, (3) outlining the
rationale and empirical support for assessing and diagnosing OC and common assessment problems, (4) providing an overview of the
core theoretical tenants underlying RO-DBT including the key hypothesized mechanism of change and (S) providing a brief summary of
structural treatment components and a case study to illustrate treatment strategies.

Clinical features
Maladaptive OC, as conceptualized by Lynch (in press), is characterized by four core deficits.

1, Low receptivity and openness. This is manifested by high risk aversion, hypervigilance for threat, avoidance of novelty, and automatic

discounting of critical feedback. OC clients show low trait openness to experience.

2. Low flexible-control. This is manifested by compulsive needs for structure, hyper- perfectionism, compulsive planning and rehearsal,
rigid rule-governed behaviour and strict moral convictions. OC clients show high trait moral certitude, high trait compulsive striving
and high trait detail-focused processing.

3. Inhibited emotional expression and low emotional awareness. This is manifested by inhibited emotional expressions or insincere
emotional expressions (e.g. smiling when distressed), minimization of distress and/or lack of interoceptive awareness (e.g. alexithymia).
OC clients show high trait emotion expression inhibition.

4, Lack of social connectedness and intimacy with others. This is manifested by aloof and distant relationships, high social comparisons, high
envy, resentment, bitterness, and low empathy. OC clients show low trait affiliation needs.

In addition to these four core deficits, OC clients also show high trait negative emotionality and low trait positive emotionality. All of these

traits of high OC clients will be described in detail in the section on assessment of OC.


Overcontrol and axis I and II disorders

The distinction made between axis I and axis II disorders in the following discussion refers to the first two axes in the DSM-IV (APA, 1994,
2000) multiaxial classification system, which has been dropped from DSM-S (APA, 2013). However, this distinction and nomenclature was
used during the development of RO-DBT and so is used in this chapter.

A major supposition of this chapter is that personality matters when it comes to understanding treatment-resistant or chronic problems.
This core premise is based on remarkable consistency from large-scale studies examining comorbidity revealing two broad styles of coping
- OC and undercontrol (UC) - associated with the development of chronic forms of internalizing and externalizing problems, respectively
(e.g. Kendler et al., 2003; Krueger, 1999; Krueger et al., 1998; Vollebergh et al., 2001). UC problems involve difficulties associated with low
inhibitory control. These include dramatic-erratic, mood-dependent, chaotic interpersonal relationships, excessive avoidance coping and an
overtly expressive nature, all of which characterize cluster B personality disorders (APA, 2013). In contrast, OC problems involve features
associated with high inhibitory control, including excessive approach coping, compulsive planning, maladaptive preoccupation with
details, and an aloof and distant interpersonal style most often seen in cluster A and C personality disorders, chronic depression, anorexia
nervosa and autism spectrum disorders (Lynch & Cheavens, 2008; Riso et al., 2003; Zucker et al., 2007).

Interestingly, over the last decades the vast majority of published research on personality disorders has focused on those in cluster B, most
prominently borderline and antisocial personality disorder (Clark, 2005). On the other hand, there has been a dearth of research examining
cluster A and C personality disorders despite evidence that they are highly prevalent (Coid et al., 2006; Torgersen et al., 2001; Zimmerman
et al, 2005S) and associated with impaired functioning and increased health care use (Grant et al., 2004; Maclean et al., 2014). Plus, they
are associated with poor treatment response, particularly when comorbid with axis I disorders (Newton-Howes et al., 2006; Oleski et al.,
2012). Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, a cluster C prototypical OC disorder, is the most prevalent personality disorder (Grant


et al., 2004; Jackson & Burgess, 2000; Torgersen, 2005), with high rates found among both the general population (Ekselius et al., 2001;
Lenzenweger, 2008; Samuels, 2011) and clinical samples (Zimmerman et al., 2005).

Moreover, a plethora of studies have established strong links between anorexia nervosa and OC features such as maladaptive perfectionism
(Bulik et al., 2003; Fairburn et al., 1999; Halmi et al., 2000, 2005), restraint, negative emotionality, rigidity, inflexibility and preoccupation
with detail (Lilenfeld et al., 2006; Serpell et al., 2002; Tokley & Kemps, 2007; Wonderlich et al., 2005; Wonderlich & Mitchell, 2001), and set-
shifting difficulties (Roberts et al., 2007; Tchanturia et al., 2004). OC traits have been recorded to premorbidly exist prior to the development
of anorexia nervosa (Anderluh et al., 2009) and OC features are associated with a negative outcome in anorexia nervosa (Crane et al., 2007;
Lilenfeld et al., 2006). In an exploratory study, Reas et al. (2013) found that women with obsessive-compulsive PD had a rate of anorexia
nervosa five times higher than psychiatric comparison groups

There is also a strong and well-established link between chronic or treatment-resistant depression and OC. An estimated 40-60%
of unipolar depressed clients meet criteria for comorbid personality disorder (Fava et al., 2002; Klein et al., 1995; Riso et al., 2003).
OC personality disorders are the most common and least likely to respond to treatment, particularly paranoid, avoidant and obsessive-
compulsive personality disorders (Candrian et al., 2008; Fava et al., 2002; Fournier et al., 2009). Refractory depression - defined as
unresponsive depression that is either treatment-resistant, chronic, or both - represents a prototypical OC disorder as evidenced by higher
rates of self-criticism, impaired autonomy, rigid internalized expectations, excessive control of spontaneous emotion, and inordinate fears
of making mistakes relative to non-chronic depressed individuals (Riso et al., 2003).

RO-DBT is posited to have utility with treatment-resistant anxiety disorders as well as disorders of the autistic spectrum. Research shows
that obsessive-compulsive disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder share a number of typical OC coping problems, such
as extremely rigid patterns of thinking (obsessions and mental rituals in the case of obsessive-compulsive disorder) and difficulties in
tolerating change and/or uncertainty (e.g. Gallagher et al., 2003; Samuel & Griffin, 2015; Schultz & Searleman, 2002). In addition, obsessive-
compulsive disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder both often involve maladaptive hoarding behaviours (e.g. Steketee &


Frost, 2003). From an RO-DBT perspective, hoarding represents one example of how maladaptive OC can lead to problems - in this case,
compulsive planning. The high harm avoidance and low sociability, novelty-seeking and reward dependence that characterize individuals
with autism spectrum disorders are also characteristic of OC individuals more broadly (Vuijk et al., 2011). Recent factor-analytically derived
evidence on the autistic spectrum phenotype show that it is structured around pragmatic language difficulties, aloofness, and behavioural
and cognitive rigidity (Wainer et al., 2011). Lugnegard et al. (2012) investigated the prevalence of personality disorder in patients with a
diagnosis of Asperger's syndrome. Approximately half of their sample met criteria for a personality disorder of cluster A or C exclusively.
Clinical research applying RO-DBT to autism spectrum disorders and treatment-resistant anxiety is in its early stages.

Finally, it is important to note that OC is not a one-dimensional construct. That is, it does not simply represent one end of a self-
control continuum, with UC representing the other extreme. OC is a multifaceted paradigm which accounts for individual differences
in bio-temperament, and family and environmental experiences. The model of OC underlying RO-DBT parses emotion regulation into
three transacting temporal elements. These include (1) perceptual encoding factors (sensory receptor regulation) that precede (2) internal
modulatory factors (central-cognitive regulation), which then result in (3) external behavioural expressions and overt actions (response
selection regulation). By separating internal from external regulation (e.g. tendencies to act aggressively from actual acts of aggression), the
model provides a means for understanding why a person can ‘feel’ anxious on the inside and yet not display any ‘overt’ signs of anxiety.
Assessing OC: from temperaments to traits to prototype
Our model for ‘diagnosing’ maladaptive OC is founded upon two core principles. First, clinical assessment should be guided whenever
possible by empirical evidence. Second, assessment should serve to guide case formulation and facilitate decision making in clinical practice.
RO-DBT posits that core genotypic/phenoty pic differences between UC and OC problems necessitate fundamentally different interventions.
Therefore a core function of the outlined assessment protocol is to guide treatment planning.


Temperament

In contrast to other assessment models, the RO-DBT model prioritizes the influence of bio-temperament (see OC bio-temperamental
predispositions below in the section on an overview of RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory). Bio-temperamental predispositions can be
conceptualized as the higher-order factors in a hierarchy of a number of lower-order factors or traits. Similar theses on the relationship
between temperament and psychopathology have been proposed by others (Clark, 2005; Mervielde et al., 2005; Whittle et al., 2006).

OC personality traits

Our assessment approach defines traits as relatively stable patterns of behaviours, thoughts and emotions that are a function of nature-
nurture transactions. In this context nature refers to bio-temperament and nurture to family and environmental experiences. A complete
description and the empirical basis underlying this bio-temperament-trait-deficit model is given in Lynch (in press). The following is an
overview of eight hypothesized OC trait domains, how each manifests clinically, and relevant research.

Low trait openness to experience

This trait refers to rigid, inflexible and defensive reactions to novel stimuli, disconfirming feedback or unexpected conditions which severely
limit opportunities to learn new behaviour and exploit the benefits of social interaction (Lynch, in press). Low openness sends a powerful
social-signal to others. Most people dislike interacting with someone who appears to be a ‘know-it-all’; is closed-minded; and/or tends
to habitually ignore, dismiss or dispute corrective feedback. Thus, low openness is posited to not only reduce new learning, but to also
exacerbate OC social isolation and/or ostracism from others.


High trait moral certitude

This trait refers to rigid beliefs that there is always a right and a wrong way to do things; that there is a set of rules and principles that must
be adhered to; and a compulsive need for order and structure. This results in actions often being motivated by a sense of duty or social-
obligation. For example, an OC client is likely to report they attended a party because ‘I thought it was the right thing to do’ not because ‘I
felt like it would be fun.’ This can lead to burnout and resentment when their self-sacrifices go unrecognized by others and to occasional
‘emotional leakages’ (e.g. an angry outburst in public directed at a person who failed to give up their seat for an elderly person on the subway).
High moral certitude may be strongly influenced by non-affective OC bio-temperamental predispositions and related traits to notice small
rather than global changes in the environment. Detail-focused processing which typifies OC clients is discussed further later. High levels
of the trait ‘conscientiousness’ which encompasses detail-focused processing has been found to characterize individuals with obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder, which is a prototypical OC condition (Samuel & Gore, 2012; Samuel & Widiger, 2008, 2010, 2011).

High trait compulsive striving

This trait refers to external behaviours related to excessive approach coping. These include high agency, high social dominance, high
persistence in non-rewarding activities in order to achieve a goal, strong capacities to delay gratification, excessive distress tolerance, and
compulsive working, fixing and planning. The heightened sense of urgency that characterizes most OC clients is manifested by compulsive
attempts to quickly resolve problems (or potential problems) and then just as quickly move on to the next one (or imagined next one)
without a rest in between. This personal style is analogous to that of the White Rabbit character in Lewis Carroll's (1865/2000) book Alice's
Adventures in Wonderland. In the 1951 Disney film, the White Rabbit sings: ‘I'm late! I'm late! For a very important date! No time to say hello,
goodbye! I'm late! I'm late! I'm late!’ (Disney, 1951). Compulsive striving limits time for enjoyment or fun. OC clients may ‘secretly do almost
anything’ or tolerate a great deal of distress or pain to get ahead, win or achieve a desired goal. As a consequence, they are less likely to put


off an important task because of the discomfort it evokes and more likely to obsessively work hard until the problem is resolved. OC clients
are not easily impressed by the achievements of others. They are also likely to be secretly proud of their superior capacities to tolerate pain,
delay gratification, and/or persist in a non-rewarding activity in order to achieve a long-term goal or objective. This allows little time for non-
competitive or non-productive recreation or relaxation such as taking a nap, reading a fictional novel, or watching clouds float by. Indeed,
most recreational activities in which OC individuals engage are geared towards self-improvement and are competitive in nature (e.g.
mountain climbing, running in marathons). The high performance-focused nature of OC clients triggers frequent social comparisons in
order to confirm that their ‘performance’ was adequate or superior. This makes it more likely for them to experience envy, resentment and
desires for revenge towards those who they perceive as receiving an unfair advantage over them. They may be willing to do almost anything
to get ahead. As a consequence, they may have lied, cheated or deceived others in order to win, defeat a rival, or avoid public criticism. Yet,
inwardly they are likely to feel ashamed about how they obtained their achievements. This may lead to secret self-hate. A compulsive
orientation towards potential future consequences has been documented in obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (Eskedal & Demetri,
2006; Gallagher et al., 2003; Salzman, 1980). OC superior capacities to inhibit expressions of emotion; delay gratification or resist
temptation; attend to minute details associated with non-immediate future contingencies by, for example, compulsively planning ahead;
and persisting in non-rewarding actions have social and personal hidden costs.

High trait detail-focused processing

This trait refers to preference for details over global processing, insistence on sameness, hypervigilance for small discrepancies, high pattern
recognition, and preference for symmetry over asymmetry (Calvo et al., 2009; Srinivasagam et al., 1995; Suda et al., 2014). It is sometimes
referred to as weak central coherence in the autism and eating disorder literature (Happé & Frith, 2006; Lopez et al., 2008). Shapiro (1965)
referred to this trait as attention to small local details and linked it to obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. This hypothesis has been
supported by Yovel et al.'s (2005) research which showed a correlation between a local rather than global visual attention style and obsessive-


compulsive traits. Research on anorexia nervosa and autism shows that clients with these OC disorders exhibit weaknesses on tasks
demanding global processing (Happé & Frith, 2006; Lang et al., 2014; Lang & Tchanturia, 2014), whereas they demonstrate a bias for and/
or superior capacities for detailed-focused or local processing (Aloi et al., 2015; Lopez et al., 2008, 2009; Losh et al., 2009). Detailed-focused
processing is posited to represent a non-emotional bio- temperamental attribute that occurs at the sensory-receptor or subcortical level of
processing and is preconscious (Lynch, in press). Thus, the brains of many OC clients are hardwired to ‘see the trees but miss the forest’. And
yet the consequences of detailed-focused processing may often be emotional! For example, noticing a book out of alignment on a bookshelf
may start as a non-emotional observation. This observation may trigger an urge to straighten or realign the book. If blocked from being
expressed quickly, the frustrated urge may lead to anger. For many OC clients, exceptional perceptual abilities to notice small changes in the
environment can come to dominate their daily routines, leaving little time for other activities.

High emotion expression inhibition

This trait refers to the degree to which a person attempts to control, inhibit, restrain or suppress how they express their emotions. It does
not refer to internal regulation of emotion (e.g. thought suppression). Rather it is concerned with social-signalling deficits pertaining to
how OC clients habitually expresses their inner emotional experience. Negative social consequences arise when emotional expressions are
inappropriate given the context (e.g. a flat facial expression when out on a first date) and/or when what is expressed overtly does not match
internal emotional experiences (e.g. smiling when distressed or angry). Studies have consistently reported decreased emotional expression
among OC clients (Casper, 1990; Davies et al., 2011; Forbush & Watson, 2006; Geller et al., 2000; Kaye, 2008). Clinically this most often
manifests in low rates of vulnerable self-disclosure; inhibited, frozen, overly prosocial and insincere facial expressions; and constrained
body movements and gestures.


Low trait affiliation needs

This trait refers to the degree to which a person values giving and receiving warmth and affection and enjoys intimate social bonds (Depue
& Morrone-Strupinsky, 2005). Significantly, the OC domain of ‘low trait affiliation needs’ is purposefully separated from ‘agreeableness’ and
related behaviours such as politeness, sending cooperative social-signals, and displaying friendly gestures. The domain ‘low trait affiliation
needs’ refers to diminished pleasure during social interactions and a low desire for intimacy which are internal experiences. In contrast,
agreeableness refers to prosocial and cooperative signalling behaviours which are external expressions or overt behaviours that can occur
independent of mood and internal experiences. Separating internal mood from external behaviour helps explain how it is possible for an OC
client to report low desires for warmth or intimacy (internal experience) and yet behave in an agreeable, affable or friendly manner out of
a sense of social obligation (overt behaviour). Clinically this trait may manifest by strong desires to abandon a relationship rather than deal
directly with a conflict, despite engaging in free-flowing conversation, non-goal-focused interactions or spontaneous unstructured social
events (e.g. parties and picnics). Individuals with low affiliation needs tend to be overly cautious when getting to know another person,
including their therapist. Despite initially appearing polite or affable early in a relationship or during greetings, they may engage in frequent
social comparisons (because OC clients are performance-focused). This may lead them to later reveal long-held negative judgements or
grudges towards others. They may rarely apologize. They may also believe that love is phony or naive. They may describe themselves as
detached or different from others. However, their low social-connectedness is not necessarily due to lack of contact with others. For example,
they will attend social events out of obligation. They may secretly believe that they are ‘too complex’ to ever be understood (known in RO-
DBT as the ‘enigma complex’). Few people in their social networks may know how OC people perceive themselves or the world

High trait negative emotionality

This trait is also referred to in the literature as temperamental threat sensitivity or negative affectivity. It is associated with a wide range of


psychopathology (e.g. Krueger et al., 1996; Watson & Clark, 1984) including autism (Clifford et al., 2013; Schwartz et al., 2009), obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder (Steenkamp et al., 2015) and anorexia nervosa (Watters & Malouft, 2012). Strober et al. (2007) have
provided evidence suggesting that the neurocircuitry of fear and anxiety may be a useful heuristic framework for the interpretation of OC
symptoms across different disorders. According to the RO-DBT model, negative emotionality is a predisposing factor for other OC behaviours
and characteristics. Clients characterized by OC are posited to be high in negative emotionality and experience aversive tension across time
and context, even in situations that most others experience as safe. Clinically this can manifest in tense-monotonic voice tones, flat facial
affect, guarded and wary behaviours when entering new situations, compulsive checking and rechecking of safety cues despite evidence
that all is well, and avoiding risks that cannot be controlled or planned in advance. Clients characterized by OC are likely to obsessively
scan for potential mistakes. Tasks may be carried out with extreme deliberation and repetitive checks for potential errors. OC individuals
dislike being ‘the centre of attention’, ‘put on the spot’ or ‘being in the limelight’ unless they can plan for it in advance. Heightened bio-
temperamental threat sensitivity and frequent defensive-arousal (e.g. anxiety), which are features of high trait negative emotionality, may
underlie the compulsive rehearsal of what will be said or done prior to social events. The maladaptive nature of obsessive rehearsal becomes
most evident in social situations where premeditated behaviour is either not possible or may be perceived by others as disingenuous,
inauthentic or deceitful (e.g. dating, parties, celebrations, or impromptu requests for a speech or toast).

Low trait positive emotionality

Trait positive emotionality refers to the internal emotional experience of positive states such as joy and happiness. It should not be confused
with extraversion. Measures of extraversion typically collapse items reflecting internal experience (positive affect) and external behaviours
(agency, active pursuit of goals) together. However, clients characterized as OC are hypothesized to exhibit diminished positive affect and
reduced spontaneous expressions of excitatory reward or joy (Lynch, in press) and yet are high in agency (assertiveness and experiences of
potency following accomplishment of goals). Conceptually separating internal and external regulation allows us to account for the OC client


who reports low positive emotion yet high approach coping. Deficits in bio-temperamental reward sensitivity (trait positive emotionality)
have been linked primarily with depression (Clark & Watson, 1991; Durbin et al., 2005) and, to a lesser extent, schizophrenia and social
phobia (Mineka et al., 1998). OC clients are posited to over-rely on executive neural networks (‘top-down’) regulatory control, suggesting
brain-behavioural responses that prioritize strategic means of obtaining desired goals rather than hedonic motivations. That is, the brains
of OC individuals are hardwired to devise a logical means of achieving a goal (most often in order to avoid an anticipated threat or achieve a
goal), rather than being motivated by their current emotional state or the anticipation of future pleasure. Clinically this can be seen by the
tendency of OC clients to take life and themselves too seriously. They may rarely engage in spontaneous laughter, giggling, or silly behaviour.
They rarely express excitatory joy. They tend to minimize or downplay compliments or positive events that they believe they did not earn
or deserve. Positive mood states are most often associated with success in applying self-control, achieving a goal, or being able to resist
temptation. However, these positive mood states tend to be very transient. This, in part, accounts for the OC trait of compulsive striving
described earlier.

Diagnosing OC step-by-step: an OC diagnostic algorithm

The diagnostic protocol for OC is organized into four essential sequential steps and a fifth optional step. It is designed for easy integration
into clinical practice. It combines hierarchical dimensional models of classifying psychopathology (i.e. trait approach) that cut across
disorders, with prototype models that enables a categorical diagnosis to facilitate ‘low-cost’ clinical decisions. Illustrative sections of the
assessment instruments from the protocol are contained in a series of appendices at the end of the chapter. The full assessment protocol is
contained in Lynch (in press).

Step 1

The first step consists of the client completing two self-report measures:


1, The Assessing Styles of Coping measure (see Appendix 28A);

2. The OC Trait Rating Scale (see Appendix 28B).

These measures take approximately 15 minutes to complete and could be given as part of a battery of self-report measures (e.g.
demographics, ratings of distress, measures of occupational or interpersonal functioning) that clients are typically asked to complete prior
to the first meeting with a therapist. The Assessing Styles of Coping self-report measure uses word-pairs derived from research examining
personality-descriptive adjectives (e.g. Ashton et al., 2004; Goldberg & Kilkowski, 1985) in order to provide a global picture as to whether a
client tends towards OC or UC. The OC Trait Rating Scale was developed with a view of assessing the extent to which a client endorses OC
traits in eight domains.

Step 2

In the second step the clinician conducts structured or semi-structured diagnostic interviews, a standard clinical practice in most clinics.
If a non-structured format is employed, the clinician should be attentive to statements suggesting the presence of an OC coping style.
For example, if a client reports obsessive behaviours, the assessor would follow up with questions informed by the diagnostic criteria for
obsessive-compulsive disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder to ascertain whether either of these disorders is present. The
questions in Table 28.1 can help facilitate this.

If the interview is structured, then the assessor can use measures such as the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (First et al., 2015),
the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality Disorders (First et al., 1997) or the International Personality Disorder
Examination (Loranger et al., 1997) to obtain DSM diagnoses.

Table 28.1 Assessing overcontrol: examples of clinical interview questions


Could other people say that you are strict in your view of people and things?

Are you a perfectionist?

Do you have a strong eye for detail?

Can you easily spot the lack of symmetry in your surroundings?

Are you cautious and careful about how you do things?

Are you the sort of person that will carefully think of all options before taking a decision?

Do you spend much time organizing your space or your time?

Do you think before acting?

Do you consider yourself a deep thinker?

Are you good at delaying gratification or pleasure?

Are you able to easily inhibit an impulse?

Do you consider yourself conscientious?

Are you quiet and reserved during social interactions?

Are you restrained when you meet new people?

Note: The full set of the clinical interview questions can be found in Lynch (in press).
OC axis II personality disorders are subsumed under DSM cluster A (paranoid, schizotypal and schizoid) and cluster C (obsessive-compulsive,
avoidant and possibly dependent personality disorders). Core shared features among OC personality disorders are: (1) strong desires to
control one’s environment, (2) reserved emotional expression, (3) limited social interactions and aloof/distant interactions and (4) cognitive
and behavioural rigidity. In contrast, UC axis II disorders are represented by cluster B diagnoses in DSM-5 (i.e. borderline, antisocial,
histrionic, narcissistic).


OC axis I disorders in DSM-5 are represented by autism spectrum disorders, anorexia nervosa, treatment-resistant anxiety disorders,
chronic depression and somatic symptom disorder associated with chronic back pain or temporomandibular pain. Examples of UC axis I
disorders include conduct disorders and bipolar disorder. Irrespective of the format of the interview, it should ideally offer information
that matches the client with official diagnostic categories associated with OC (or UC), while accounting for common errors in assessment
described later in this chapter.

Step 3

The third step in the diagnosis of OC is informed by prototype models of personality assessment (e.g. Westen et al., 2010). It occurs after the
clinical interview has been completed and the client has left the room where the assessment took place. At this point the clinician completes
the Overcontrolled Global Prototype Rating Scale (see Appendix 28C). This measure takes approximately 5 minutes to complete and it can be
repeated over the course of treatment to monitor clinical improvement. The prototype rating scale yields an overall score and scores for
two OC social-signalling subtypes (‘overly disagreeable’ and ‘overly agreeable’) that differ primarily in how the person desires to be perceived
by others (i.e. their public persona). OC subtype trait ratings are only made if a client has already been prototyped as OC (i.e. has achieved
an overall score of 17 or higher). Identifying a client’s OC subtype can be highly useful in treatment planning and targeting. For example,
OC individuals with OC subtype traits of over-agreeableness need to learn how to express anger directly rather than ‘keeping it bottled up
inside’. In contrast, those with trait over-disagreeableness need to learn how to ‘reveal vulnerability to others’ rather than compulsively
pretend to be unfazed or strong.

Step 4

The fourth step involves the assessor completing the Clinician Rated OC Trait Rating Form (Appendix 28D). A score of 40 or higher on this
instrument indicates OC ‘caseness’, that is, the individual’s profile closely matches the OC trait pattern. The clinician can use individual trait


ratings to guide treatment planning. For example, high scores on emotion expression inhibition highlight the importance of targeting this
feature in treatment.
Step 5
The final step, which is optional, involves use of recommended OC self-report temperament and traits measures that can be currently found
in the existing literature (see Table 28.2) as a supplement to the first four steps. Most clinics operationalize this by providing the client with a
packet of questionnaires at the end of the clinical interview and requesting they complete the measures prior to their next scheduled session
(RO-DBT recommended OC measures may be accessed at http://www.radicallyopen.net/)
Table 28.2 Supplemental OC outcome measures
Measure sof Description Access Authors
items
Clinical Outcome in 34 The CORE measures the This scale is freely available it Evans et al., 2002)
Routine Evaluation level of psychological can be downloaded at: http://
(CORE) global distress a patient www.coreims.co.uk/download-pdfs
has experienced in the
last week. It consists of 4
subscales: Subjective Well-
Being, Problems/Symptoms,
ceeseeesenennnetetetntenntennettnnenneetneesneeseeeses if PUNCUOMING and RA cc caseensetnsetnsetnsetnsetneetnsetneetesetnetteesinneteneteneteetse


Harm (risk or harm to self or
others).
Pathological Obsessive- 49 The POPS is self-report This scale will soon be freely available Pinto, 2011)
Compulsive Personality measure of maladaptive - until then, contact Anthony Pinto,
Scale (POPS) OCPD. It consists of five Ph.D., at apintol@nshs.edu
specific trait factors (rigidity,
emotional overcontrol,
maladaptive perfectionism,
reluctance to delegate and
difficulty with change) and an
overall factor score.
Social Safeness and 11 This scale was developed to This scale is freely available. Gilbert et al.
Pleasure Scale (SSPS) measure the extent to which 2009)
people experience their social
worlds as safe, warm and
soothing.
Patient Health 9 The PHQ-9 is a short but This scale is freely available at http:// Kroenke, Spitzer,
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) psychometrically valid phgscreeners.com/pdfs/02_PHQ-9/ & Williams, 2001)
assessment of depressive English.pdf
symptoms.
A ‘formal’ diagnosis of OC is made by collating the various sources of information described earlier, that is, scores from client self-
report instruments, diagnostic interview data, and clinician ratings of traits and prototype features. The multidimensional nature of this


assessment approach is designed to enhance the confidence with which a diagnosis is given while providing important clinical information
that may prove useful in case formulation.
Common errors in assessing OC
There are five common errors in assessing OC:

+ Assuming that self-injury is exclusively seen among individuals with borderline personality disorder;

+ Assuming that strong expression of emotion only occurs in UC individuals;

+ Assuming that planned and spontaneous risk-taking are similar when assessing risk aversion among OC individuals;

+ Assuming that reports of limited emotional experience mean that OC clients are unemotional;

+ Assuming that low reports of distress mean that OC client are not suffering.

Each of these will be described in turn

Self-injury means personality disorder
Perhaps the most common assessment error is to assume that self-injury is exclusively seen among individuals with borderline personality
disorder and other UC disorders. Several studies have shown that intentional self-injury is a complex behaviour which serves a range
of functions - most frequently regulation of negative affect and self-punishment - and should not solely be viewed as an erratic-
dramatic pattern of interpersonal communication, or a mechanism of attention- or sensation-seeking (Klonsky, 2007; Nock, 2009). Despite
being diagnostically heterogeneous, deliberate self-harm is markedly frequent in disorders that are strongly linked with OC, for example
dysthymia, depression, eating disorders and cluster A personality disorders (Claes et al., 2010; Ghaziuddin et al., 1991; Hintikka et al., 2009;


Klonsky et al., 2003; Nock et al., 2006; Selby et al., 2012). There is also evidence of a specific type of self-injury, the nature of which appears to
be in complete accordance with the phenotype, traits and coping behaviours which characterize OC conditions. This is illustrated by results
from a study by Klonsky and Olino (2008), who identified a subgroup of self- injurious adolescents who almost exclusively self-harm in
private. Their self-injury was planned well in advance. Self-injury occurred more than 1 hour after the initial urge to self-injure. Importantly,
this group was characterized by high suicidality. Forty-six percent reported a prior suicide attempt, and 32% reported having received
medical treatment associated with a suicide attempt. In general, OC self-injury can be distinguished from UC self-injury by its non-mood-
dependent, premeditated, and private nature. It may have a self-punishment function as opposed to an attention-seeking function (Lynch,
in press; Lynch & Cozza, 2009).

Strong emotional expression and emotional leakage

Another common misconception is to presume that strong expression of emotion is confined to individuals with UC conditions. It is
important to emphasize that OC individuals do experience strong emotions although they typically conceal what they are feeling. In line
with the OC neuroregulatory model, the self-reported emotional reactions of OC individuals are intense despite inhibited expression, as
shown for example in studies of anorexia nervosa (Claes et al., 2012; Davies et al., 2011). Nonetheless it is not unusual for the attempts of
OC individuals to control emotional behaviour to fail, particularly in periods of stress. For example, Villemarette-Pittman et al. (2004) found
that outbursts of aggressive behaviour may occur in people with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder stemming from strong emotions
such as extreme anger. OC clients may display overly aggressive behaviour in private environments (e.g. among family members). However,
they tend to avoid reporting this unless explicitly asked or may downplay the severity of their aggression in order to avoid criticism
or humiliation. In RO-DBT emotional displays that occur at higher intensity than the client would prefer are referred to as ‘emotional
leakage’. Two features of OC emotional leakage can help in making a differential diagnosis between OC and UC: (1) OC leakages occur most
often in private and infrequently in public; and (2) OC leakages are usually followed by excessive shame and/or guilt, although the client


may downplay the importance of the event in an effort to diminish the negative feelings associated with it. Thus, when assessing anger
outbursts, it is essential to determine where they most often occur, the degree to which others outside the immediate family are aware
of these outbursts, and the extent to which this emotional leakage is viewed as highly shameful and different from how clients normally
behave in public

Not all risk-taking behaviours are the same

When assessing risk aversion among OC individuals it is important to determine the extent to which the risk-taking is spontaneous or
planned. For example, skydiving is a carefully planned risk. Making an impromptu speech at a social gathering is an example of spontaneous
risk-taking. It is important to determine the extent to which risk-taking involves controlling or dominating resources, the environment,
or other people in order to achieve a goal (e.g. the CEO of a company deciding to buy out a competitor) versus expressing vulnerability to
seek intimacy (e.g. taking a risk to disclose genuine feelings or doubts to another person to become closer to them). In general, risk-taking
behaviour among OC individuals tends to be instrumental (i.e. to achieve a goal, to right a wrong, to stand up for what they believe is morally
correct) rather than relational (e.g. quitting a job so they can live closer to their girlfriend, sharing their deepest fears or doubts with someone
to achieve intimacy).

Low awareness of feelings and under-reporting of emotional states

Clinicians should be aware that OC individuals, even when directly asked about their emotions, tend to describe their experiences non-
emotionally. For example, in answer to the question ‘Have you been experiencing a sad or gloomy mood lately?’ an OC client might reply:
‘I think it is important to keep busy. I still do my crossword puzzles and keep up with small tasks. Despite feeling tired I have also tried
going to the gym but I quit after going two times.’ Notice that in this instance the patient did not answer the question about experiencing
low mood. Rather they described physical tiredness and how they have been coping. It is important to notice whether or not an OC client


actually answers the question asked. In this example, the clinician can only guess what the client's mood state was, based on the description
of tiredness and coping strategies given by the client. As such, clinicians should be prepared to repeat questions or rephrase them when
assessing the emotional experiences of OC clients. Emotional attenuation and low emotional awareness among OC clients may be due toa
variety of factors. They may have a lack of experience in labelling emotions. Under-reporting emotions may have been reinforced by family
members or others in their environment. Bio-temperamental factors such as low reward sensitivity may reduce reactivity to certain types
of emotional stimuli. However, emotional attenuation does not mean that OC clients are unemotional. Instead, they may struggle to notice
or describe emotional experiences. They may also use words to describe their emotional experiences that downplay the intensity of their
feelings, or which are not immediately recognizable by others.

The illusion of mental health

OC clients tend to under-report symptoms of distress. Within the literature on psychopathology, individuals who score low on measures of
psychological distress and high on measures of defensiveness or social desirability (by presenting themselves in an overly positive way) are
referred to as repressors (Shedler et al., 1993, 1994). This style of coping is highly represented among OC patients. Therefore, we recommend
that when assessing potential OC patients clinicians interpret results of self-report instrument in Appendices 28A and 28B with scores from
social desirability or defensiveness scales such as the Balanced Inventory of Desirable Responding (Paulhus, 1988). This can help determine
the extent a person may be under-reporting pathology. OC patients frequently report difficulties identifying and describing emotions.
Therefore, measures designed to assess alexithymia, such as the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20; Bagby et al., 1994), are also likely to
prove useful in assessing OC.

An overview of RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory

In RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory it is proposed that an OC coping style develops and is maintained over time via reciprocal transactions


between bio-temperamental and genetic influences (nature), family and environmental factors (nurture) and self-control tendencies
(coping) as shown in Figure 28.1. Specifically, bio-temperamental predispositions for heightened threat sensitivity, diminished reward
sensitivity, high inhibitory control capacities, and superior attention for details are posited to transact with early family and cultural
experiences emphasizing high performance, structure and control, restraint and perfection, resulting in a risk-avoidant and OC coping style
that limits opportunities to flexibly adapt to changing conditions and establish close social bonds.

RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory proposes that bio-temperament may be the driving force behind chronicity and personality dysfunction
making these problems less amenable to environmental feedback or learning (Lynch et al., 2016). For example, heightened bio-
temperamental detail over global processing common among OC clients occurs at the sensory- receptor or preconscious level of perception
(Lynch, in press; Ronald et al., 2005). This may explain why OC clients often insist that their perceptions are correct. They tend to notice
small changes in the environment that others overlook. Yet, their penchant for focusing on details may make it harder for OC clients to
see the ‘big picture’. Their compulsive needs for order and symmetry can come to dominate their daily routines, leaving little time for
rest, recreation or socializing. A distinctive feature of RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory is the proposition that excessive bio-temperamental
inhibitory control influences psychological well-being via the negative impact it has on social-signalling and social-connectedness.

Help! My self-control is out of control!

Acentral tenant in RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory is that self-control is highly valued by most societies (e.g. see Vazsonyi & KlanjSek, 2008).
For OC clients, the high value society places on self-control is both a blessing anda curse. It is a blessing because their capacity for self-control
is often admired. It is a curse because their personal suffering arising from OC often goes unrecognized. Indeed, OC clients set high personal
standards for themselves (and others) and are expert at not conveying the personal costs of adhering to these high standards (and others
failing to) by appearing distressed in public. They are perfectionists who have ‘too much of a good thing’. Their self-control is out of control.


They suffer as a result of this. Thus, rather than highlighting what is wrong with an OC client, RO-DBT starts by observing what is ‘healthy
about all of us’ and uses this to guide treatment interventions.
Nature
Low Reward Sensitivity
High Threat Sensitivity
High Inhibitory Control
High Attention for Details
Nurture Coping
Mistakes Intolerable Mask Inner Feelings
| Never Appear Vulnerable | (mm) | Avoid Risk
Structure & Control \ Dislike ‘Centre of
Essential Attention’
Winning Imperative Aloof and Distant


Figure 28.1 The RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory of overcontrolled disorders

RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory proposes that psychological well-being involves three core transacting features:

1, Receptivity and openness to new experience and disconfirming feedback in order to learn;

2. Flexible-control in order to adapt to changing environmental conditions;

3. Intimacy and connectedness with at least one other person.

Thus, a well-adjusted person is able to be open to disconfirming feedback, but can also modify their behaviour to be more effective in a
manner that takes account of the needs of others. Rather than focusing on how to correct, improve, regulate, accept, or behave better, RO-
DBT neurobiosocial theory posits that the central problem underlying maladaptive OC is emotional loneliness secondary to social-signalling
deficits and a low level of trait openness.

Social-signalling matters!

Interestingly, among humans and non-human primates, fearful and aggressive facial expressions have been shown to trigger unconditioned
defensive responses (Adolphs, 2008; Davies et al., 2011). The unconditioned and contagious nature of facial expressions influences
perception of subsequent stimuli. For example, a subliminally brief view of happy facial expressions results in higher subjective ratings of
the attractiveness, pleasantness and monetary value of a fruit drink, without conscious awareness of the subliminal stimuli (Berridge &
Winkielman, 2003). Thus, facial affect expression appears to have evolved in humans both to communicate and influence others. It signals
intentions and triggers emotional reactions in the recipient. (The facilitative functions of emotion will be considered further later.)


RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory posits that social-signalling among humans is regulated by both top-down central-cognitive regulatory
factors and bottom-up processes associated with the peripheral nervous system. When we feel safe, the neural substrate linked with
the parasympathetic nervous system-mediated ventral vagal complex (PNS-VVC) is activated. This triggers feelings of contentment,
friendliness, and behaviours associated with social-engagement via innervation of muscles involved with modulating voice tone (prosody),
listening to human speech, maintaining eye contact and making appropriate facial expressions (Porges, 1995, 2001). However, when the
environment is perceived as threatening, the PNS-ventral vagal social-safety system is disengaged. The sympathetic nervous system (SNS)
defensive-arousal and fight/flight responses become dominant. Empathic perception (e.g. ability to perceive facial affect) and prosocial-
signalling becomes impaired. This results in gaze aversion, frozen or flat facial expressions, and monotonic voice tones. Neuroimaging
studies support the link between the PNS and feeling safe. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex has been found to modulate the vagal efferent
outflow to the heart (Wong et al., 2007) and social-safety responses while inhibiting SNS activity (Milad et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2013).

Unfortunately, heightened threat sensitivity associated with OC maladaptive coping makes withdrawal of PNS-mediated social-safety
responses common. As a consequence, OC individuals are more likely to unintentionally bring SNS-mediated defensive mood states that
impair cooperative signalling into social interactions. Indeed, robust research has demonstrated that both chronic inhibition of emotional
expression and experimentally manipulated emotional suppression are associated with a range of psychological and social problems. For
example, suppression of emotional expression has been linked with higher negative affect and lower levels of positive affect (Gross &
John, 2003a); diminished well-being (Gross & John, 2003a; Haga et al., 2009); problematic interpersonal functioning and reduced social-
connectedness (English et al., 2012; Gross & John, 2003a); low social support and reduced relationship satisfaction (Srivastava et al., 2009);
degraded memory and problem solving (Richards, 2004); impaired facial-affect sensitivity (Schneider et al., 2013); as well as various forms
of internalizing psychopathology (Aldao et al., 2010; Forkmann et al., 2014; Larsen et al., 2013; Moore et al., 2008). What is more relevant for
RO-DBT is that the relationship between emotional expression and psychological and social functioning is strongly contingent on context
(Schraub et al., 2013; Soto et al., 2011) and incongruence between inner self and outer behaviour (English & John, 2013).


The problem for OC clients is that heightened SNS-mediated withdrawal of social-safety responses combined with overlearned tendencies
to mask inner feelings generate the very problem their OC style had developed to prevent. Rather than making them appear to be good
citizens and likeable individuals, people prefer not to interact with OC clients and see them as inauthentic. Expressive suppression of
emotion makes it less likely for others to desire to affiliate with the suppressor (Butler et al., 2003; Dan-Glauser & Gross, 2011; Gross &
John, 2003b). Results of research on emotional expression within a social exchange context also show that people who employ context-
inappropriate suppression of emotional expression or incongruent emotional expression, where their display of emotion does not match
inner experience, are far more likely to be perceived by others as untrustworthy or inauthentic (e.g. Boone & Buck, 2003; English & John,
2013; Kernis & Goldman, 2006; Schug et al., 2010). Thus, social-signalling matters when treating OC clients. An OC coping style works well
when it comes to sitting quietly in a monastery or studying for an exam. However, it creates significant problems when it comes to social
connectedness.

Capitalizing on the aforementioned observations, RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory introduces a unique theoretical proposition linking the
communicative functions of emotional expression to the formation of close social bonds. Lynch and colleagues hypothesize that human
species survival necessitated the development of a means to bond genetically diverse individuals in such a way that survival of the tribe
could override phylogenetically older ‘selfish’ response tendencies linked to survival of the individual. The theory contends that among
humans, emotions evolved not only to motivate actions (e.g. flight/fight) and communicate intentions (e.g. via facial expressions), but also
to facilitate the formation of strong social bonds essential for species survival (Lynch, in press; Lynch et al., 2015).

Emotions may facilitate the formation of strong social bonds via micro-mimicry and mirror neurons. Robust experimental evidence
suggests that facial expressions induce imitation of the perceived emotion in the receiver, eliciting similar emotional reactions among
interacting partners (e.g. Adolphs, 2002; Hess & Blairy, 2001; Vrana & Gross, 2004; Wild et al., 2001). Indeed, neuroimaging studies
examining the mirror neuron system have shown that viewing facial expressions automatically activates brain regions that are involved
in the production of similar expressions (Montgomery & Haxby, 2008; Van der Gaag et al., 2007). We automatically micro-mimic (in


milliseconds) the facial expressions of others, and this triggers the same brain structures and associated physiological experiences of the
person being ‘mirrored’. Thus, when we observe someone grimace in pain or laugh with joy, we are able to literally experience (albeit at a
lower level) what they are feeling inside via micro-mimicry and the mirror neuron system. By being able to viscerally join with another
person we are more likely to treat them as we would like to be treated. The stranger suddenly becomes part of our family. This capacity is
posited to have provided us with a unique evolutionary advantage. It allows us to form strong social bonds and share valuable resources
with other members of our species who were not in our immediate nuclear family (Lynch, in press). It explains the development of empathic
and altruistic behaviours. It accounts for why we are often strongly motivated to help those we hardly know (e.g. firefighters entering the
World Trade Center on 9/11). Successful mimicry of expressive behaviours displayed by interaction partners facilitates affiliation, rapport
and empathy among partners (Bernieri, 1988; Lakin & Chartrand, 2003; Stel & Vonk, 2010). Thus, RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory posits that
social-signalling matters when it comes to treating OC clients. It is both the source of their emotional loneliness and a core means for them
to rejoin their tribe and reconnect with others.

As a consequence of the postulates of RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory concerning social-signalling, outlined earlier, RO-DBT includes the

following interventions:

1, Targeting bio-temperamental deficits via skills training designed to activate the ventral- vagal mediated social-safety system (e.g.
moving facial muscles, slow and deep breathing, chewing, big gestures, raised eyebrows, loving-kindness meditations, gazing,
stretching facial muscles, yoga, massage and touch).

2. Teaching clients how to develop a range of non-verbal signalling strategies linked with prosocial and cooperative social-signals (e.g.
leaning back in one’s chair when tense, raising eyebrows, half-smiling, and taking a slow deep breath; revealing vulnerability and open
expressions of emotion).


3. Teaching therapists to use proprioceptive feedback from a neurobiological standpoint (i.e. by using mirror neurons) in order to elicit
activation of social-safety system in their clients (e.g. leaning back rather than forward in one’s chair or raising eyebrows up rather than
down when confronting maladaptive behaviour).

An overview of RO-DBT treatment structure and interventions

The RO-DBT outpatient protocol consists of weekly individual therapy sessions plus weekly skills training classes, telephone coaching (as
needed), and weekly therapist consultation team meetings (over a period of ~30 weeks). The primary target/goal in RO-DBT is to decrease
severe behavioural overcontrol, emotional loneliness, and aloofness/ social distance. Typically, individual therapy in RO-DBT involves a 55-
60 minute session that occurs weekly for approximately 30 weeks. Additional sessions can be provided as needed, for example, in order to
help a client reach a desired goal, to manage relationship termination, or if the therapist and client agree that continuation of therapy would
be beneficial. The orientation and commitment stage of RO-DBT takes up to four sessions and includes five key components: (1) confirming
self-identification of overcontrol as the core problem; (2) obtaining a commitment from the client to discuss in therapy sessions desires to
drop out of treatment before dropping out; (3) orienting the client to the RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory of overcontrol; and (4) orienting the
client to the RO-DBT key mechanism of change, where open expression leads to increased trust, which in turn leads to social connectedness.
A major aim of the orientation and commitment stage of RO-DBT is to identify collaboratively the social-signalling and other factors that
are blocking the client from living according to their values and actualizing valued goals. Values are the principles or standards a person
considers important in life that guide behaviour. These may include forming a romantic partnership, to be a warm and helpful parent to
one's children, or to be gainfully and happily employed. In contrast, goals are the means by which a personal value is achieved

Individual therapy treatment targets in RO-DBT are arranged in the following hierarchy of importance: (1) reduce life-threatening

behaviours; (2) repair alliance-ruptures; and (3) reduce OC maladaptive behaviours such as rigidity, risk aversion, emotion inhibition,


envy and bitterness, and aloofness, while increasing openness and flexibility. Unlike standard DBT (which is described in Chapter 27 of
this volume and in Linehan, 1993a, 1993b, 2014), RO-DBT hierarchically prioritizes therapeutic alliance-ruptures over therapy-interfering
behaviours. Importantly, RO-DBT does not consider alliance-ruptures as problems. They are opportunities for growth. Alliance-ruptures
and subsequent repairs provide an important means for OC clients to practise the skills needed to resolve interpersonal conflicts. OC clients
need to learn that expressing inner feelings, including those that involve conflict or disagreement, are an important part of a normal
healthy relationship. Indeed, alliance- ruptures are the essential practice grounds for learning how conflict can be intimacy enhancing. A
successful alliance-rupture repair blocks overlearned OC tendencies to abandon relationships. Consequently, RO-DBT considers it likely that
a therapeutic relationship is superficial, if by the 14th session, a therapist/client dyad has not had multiple alliance-ruptures and repairs.
Rather than impediments to therapeutic change alliance-ruptures and subsequent repairs are welcomed as core opportunities for delivering
the essence of effective RO-DBT.

Though imminent life-threatening behaviours and therapeutic alliance-ruptures take precedence when they are present, RO-DBT
conceptualizes compulsive self-control, lack of openness, and social-signalling deficits as the core difficulties for OC clients. This is based on
evidence showing that OC coping precedes the development of clients’ presenting problems (chronic depression, anorexia, social isolation,
treatment-resistant anxiety, etc.). The key in treatment targeting with OC is for the therapist to continually ask themselves in session: ‘How
might this type of social-signalling impact the formation of a strong social bond’ or ‘Would this behaviour (e.g. sudden silence, pouting,
looking away, flat affect) make it more likely or less likely for a person interacting with my client to want or desire to get to know them
better?’ Thus, ideally therapists are able to spend the majority of time on the five OC behavioural themes linked with maladaptive OC social-
signalling listed in Table 28.3. Individualized targets for each OC theme are identified, monitored on daily diary cards, and targeted for
change and/or self-enquiry.


Table 28.3 OC behavioural themes and primary social-signalling deficits
Maladaptive OC theme Social-signalling deficit
1, Inhibited emotional expression Refers to social-signalling deficits linked to emotional expression.
2. Hypervigilant and overly cautious Refers to social-signalling deficits stemming from OC bio-temperamental predispositions for
high threat sensitivity, low reward sensitivity and high detail-focused processing.
3. Rigid and rule-governed Refers to social-signalling deficits resulting from compulsive needs for order and structure.
behaviour
4. Aloof and distant relationships Refers to social-signalling deficits linked to low openness and conflict avoidance.
5. Envy and bitterness Refers to social-signalling deficits linked to compulsive striving, high social comparisons, and
high dominance.
Treatment targeting and subsequent behavioural chain analyses in RO-DBT prioritize changing problematic social-signalling deficits that
function to reduce social-connectedness over changing problematic internal experiences. Examples of problematic social-signalling deficits
include turning down help or responding to conflict with others by giving them the silent treatment. Examples of problematic internal
experiences include emotion dysregulation, distorted thinking or experiential avoidance. Individualized targets are monitored daily on
diary cards and updated regularly. This is illustrated in the case study later in this chapter.
Core radical openness
Radical openness is both the core philosophy and core skill in RO-DBT. It is informed by the confluence of three capacities posited to underlie


emotional well-being. These are openness, flexibility and social connectedness with at least one other person. Radical openness involves
actively seeking one’s ‘personal unknown’ in order to learn from an ever-changing environment. It assumes that we all bring perceptual and
regulatory biases into every moment that interfere with our ability to be open and learn from new or disconfirming information. That is, we
don’t see things as they are. We see things as we are. Radical openness alerts us to areas in our life that may need to change while retaining
an appreciation for the fact that change is not always needed or optimal.

Radical openness is derived from Malamati Sufism. The Malamatis are not so much interested in the acceptance of reality or seeing ‘what
is’ without illusion, which are central Zen Buddhist principles. Instead they question their self-centred desires for appreciation, recognition,
power or self-aggrandizement (Toussulis, 2011). Radical openness differs from radical acceptance taught as part of standard DBT (Linehan,
1993a, 1993b, 2014). Radical acceptance is ‘letting go of fighting reality’ and ‘is the way to turn suffering that cannot be tolerated into
pain that can be tolerated’ (Linehan, 1993a, p. 102). In contrast, radical openness challenges our perceptions of reality. From an RO-DBT
perspective, ‘facts’ or ‘truth’ can often be misleading. This is partly because ‘we don’t know what we don’t know’. Things are constantly
changing. There is a great deal of experience occurring outside of our conscious awareness. In RO-DBT truth is considered ‘real yet elusive’.
For example, ‘If know anything, it is that I don't know everything and neither does anyone else’ (Lynch, 2004, p. 10). The practice of radical
openness involves three steps:

1, Acknowledgement of environmental stimuli that are disconfirming, unexpected or incongruous.

2. Purposeful self-enquiry into habitual or automatic emotion-based response tendencies by asking ‘Is there something here to learn?’

rather than automatically explaining, justifying, defending, accepting, regulating, reappraising, distracting or denying what is
happening in order to feel better.


3. Flexibly responding by doing what is needed to be effective in the moment in a manner that signals humility and accounts for the needs
of others (e.g. following the rules, yet willing to break a rule when feedback suggests that following it may be counterproductive or
damaging to a relationship).

RO-DBT therapists must practise radical openness and self-enquiry themselves in order to encourage clients to use self-enquiry more

deeply. Examples of self-enquiry questions can be found in Table 28.4.
Table 28.4 Examples of self-enquiry questions
Is it possible that my bodily tension means that I am not fully open to the feedback?
If yes or possible, then: What am I avoiding?
Is there something here to learn?
Do find myself wanting to automatically explain, defend, or discount the other person's feedback or what is happening? If yes or maybe,
then: Is this a sign that I may not be truly open?
Am I finding it hard to question my point of view or even engage in self-enquiry?
If yes or maybe, then, what might this mean?
Am I talking more quickly or immediately responding to the other person’s feedback or questions?
Am I holding my breath or breathing more quickly?
Has my heart rate changed?
If yes or maybe, then, what does this mean?
What is driving me to respond so quickly?
Is it possible I am feeling threatened?


Am [able to truly pause and consider the possibility that | may be wrong or may need to change?

If yes or maybe, then, is it possible that I am operating out of fixed or fatalistic mind?

What is it that I fear?

Am I automatically blaming the other person or the environment for my emotional reactions?

If yes or maybe, then, is it possible this could represent a way for me to avoid being open to the feedback?
RO-DBT skills training classes
RO-DBT skills training classes consist of approximately 30 weekly lessons. Radical openness skills are based on the idea that social-signalling
and receptivity matter when it comes to social connectedness. The radical openness skills training classes are specifically designed to
address these deficits. The programme teaches OC clients how to relax rigid inhibitory self-control efforts, to activate the ventral-vagal
mediated social-safety system, to use nonverbal social-signalling skills linked to the mirror neuron system and the establishment of trust,
to allow vulnerable self-disclosure, to practise self-enquiry in order to learn from new experiences, to become willing to learn from critical
feedback and to reduce maladaptive social comparisons related to envy and bitterness.

RO-DBT skills training classes each last about 2.5 hours, including a break in the middle. Some programmes may wish to proceed at a
slower pace, particularly when classes contain more than eight clients. Comprehensive instructor training notes and key teaching points,
along with user-friendly handouts and worksheets, are provided in the RO-DBT skills training manual (Lynch, in press). Each weekly class
begins with the ‘Main Points’ for that week and clinicians should prioritize covering the required teaching points and exercises in each class.
Optional exercises and teaching points can be incorporated into lesson plans if time permits.

RO-DBT supervision, consultation and skills generalization
Telephone consultations by therapists outside of normal working hours are encouraged on an as-needed basis. They provide important


opportunities for aloof OC clients to practise asking for help and celebrating success. RO-DBT therapists are strongly encouraged to build
into their treatment programme a means to support therapists to practise radical openness themselves and effectively deliver the treatment.
This typically involves a weekly therapist consultation team meeting. Therapists without teams are encouraged to find a means to recreate
the function of an RO consultation team (e.g. virtual teams or supervision). Consultation team meetings serve several important functions,
including providing support for therapists, reducing therapist burnout, improving phenomenological empathy for clients and providing
treatment planning guidance. A major assumption in RO-DBT is that to help clients learn to be more open, flexible and socially connected,
therapists must practise the same skills in order to be able to model them to their clients. Thus, the consultation team in RO-DBT is
considered an important means by which therapists can ‘practise what they preach’ to their clients.

Case study

This case study is based on a composite of several OC clients from an RO-DBT multicentre randomized controlled trial (Lynch, 2014) to
protect client confidentiality.

Mrs G is a 41-year-old female with a 25-year history of recurrent depression and anxiety. During her initial RO-DBT evaluation, she
described herself as feeling depressed and different from her peers, starting from a very young age. She reported that both of her parents had
mental health problems and that her father ‘went away’ when she was 6 years old. She could not recall much about what happened during
this time period and she has had little contact with her father since. At around the age of 12 she reported that her mother had a major
mental breakdown. Since she was the older of two children, she began to assume the role of caretaker for both her mother and her younger
sister, who was 4 years younger. Despite this, she received good grades at school and at the age of 14 participated in the school’s rowing team,
winning several awards. However, she was bullied by some of her teammates and as result gave up rowing. A concerned school counsellor
referred her to a general practitioner (GP) who prescribed an antidepressant. She received good-enough grades to attend a regional university


and began to participate in athletic sports. She joined the university’s rowing team. However, at the age of 23, her best friend and fellow
teammate died in an automobile crash. Mrs G became despondent at that time and began to self-harm by cutting. When her self-injuries
were noticed by a college physician performing a routine physical-examination required for all athletes, she was referred to the university's
mental health clinic. At this clinic, she was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder, avoidant personality disorder, dysthymia and
social anxiety. She was prescribed several medications, including a mood stabilizer and an antidepressant (citalopram) and was also referred
to psychotherapy. She dropped out of psychotherapy after 3 sessions, but soon afterwards stopped cutting herself. She completed her
university degree with honours and received a teaching diploma. She currently works part-time as a teacher in the same school she attended
at the age of 16

Mrs G is divorced, with no children. Her marriage lasted 8 years. She described her ex-husband as emotionally abusive. Two years prior to
the end of the marriage, she began to engage in self-injury again. However, she promptly stopped self-harming after her husband revealed
this to their marriage counsellor. Shortly afterwards her attendance at marriage counselling sessions began to dwindle. Within a year, her
husband filed for a divorce.

During the clinical interview, she reported that despite being depressed most of her life she thinks of herself as a ‘functioning depressed
person’. She currently lives with her sister and her sister's two teenage children. She describes herself as very goal-driven and that she has
never been without a job or in some sort of higher education for all of her life. She tries to always ‘keep busy’ and feels like she is on ‘autopilot’.
Her continual unremitting gloomy mood combined with what was reported as ‘a sense emptiness’ prompted her to seek treatment again
the year prior to evaluation for participation in RO-DBT. At that point she was rediagnosed with borderline personality disorder and major
depression and referred to standard DBT. She reported dropping out of standard DBT after about 10 individual and group sessions. She said
that ‘it just wasn’t for me. I felt different.’ She decided to consider RO-DBT after reading a description about the treatment on a research
website. When she arrived at the RO-DBT clinic (at an NHS Trust in the UK), the rationale for reassessing Mrs G was explained and consent
obtained for participation in research. Her assessment was conducted by a clinical assessor trained in the RO-DBT diagnostic assessment


protocol described earlier in the chapter. This included a re-evaluation of all compatible and incompatible OC DSM axis I and II diagnoses (e.g.
borderline personality disorder is an OC-incompatible diagnosis).

Diagnosis of OC

On the RO-DBT word-pair Assessing Styles of Coping self-report measure Mrs G scored high for OC coping (her score was 41 out of a possible
score of 47). On the self-report OC Trait Rating Scale she scored high for maladaptive OC (her total score was 138). On the Overcontrolled
Global Prototype Rating Scale she was rated by the assessor after the clinical interview as exemplifying OC (her total score was 28) and
her therapist rated her as exemplifying OC on the Clinician Rated OC Trait Rating Form. SCID-I and SCID-II diagnoses included chronic
depression, obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, avoidant personality disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. Her electronic
medical record indicated that 1 year prior to the RO-DBT re-evaluation, she had met five out of the possible nine borderline personality
disorder diagnostic criteria. This resulted in her receiving a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder. However, when each of these five
criteria were reassessed from the perspective of maladaptive OC, only one of these criteria appeared to still apply - ‘identity disturbance’ -
and this was tentative. Each of these five criteria are described in turn, accompanied by the re-evaluation and an OC reformulation.
Borderline personality disorder criterion 1: identity disturbance with

markedly and persistently unstable self-image/sense of self

Re-evaluation

Mrs G described feeling like something was missing, like a ‘phony’ or a ‘fake’ or a ‘chameleon’, always changing her behaviour to suit the
needs of others. She reported always feeling anxious on the inside and like an outsider. When she was a teenager she realized if she listened to
others talk about their problems she could feel like she fit in and at the same time avoid talking about herself. She said, ‘Sometimes I feel like


my jaws are wired shut when asked personal questions. I just freeze up.’ When asked if she enjoyed listening to others she smiled and stated,
‘Not particularly. Sometimes I decide that they are an awful bore.’

OC reformulation

OC clients often feel unappreciated for self-sacrifices they have made to care for others or ‘doing the right thing’. They often feel socially
anxious and can go to extremes to hide this from others. They may appear polite or affable on the outside, but inwardly hold negative
judgements or grudges about others. Very few people may know who they really are and what they really think. They may describe
themselves as detached or different from others.

Borderline personality disorder criterion 2: recurrent suicidal behaviour,

gestures, threats or self-injuring behaviour

Re-evaluation

Mrs G self-harmed by cutting, always in private and planned in advance. She has never required medical treatment for her self-injuries.
She would always immediately stop engaging in it if she ever thought it might be discovered. For example, in college she stopped after she
realized it was noticeable while she was dressing in a locker room prior to a rowing competition. She kept a secret journal with poems and
stories about suicide or drowning at sea.

OC reformulation

Self-injury is planned, done in private, rarely requires medical attention, and only immediate family members are aware of its existence. OC
clients can romanticize suicide.


Borderline personality disorder criterion 3: chronic feelings of emptiness

Re-evaluation

Mrs G reported that she often felt empty of emotion or numb and/or had no awareness of any emotion or bodily sensation, often in what
would normally be considered stressful situations. During the interview she tended to describe her mood in terms of activity level or
physical states (e.g. tired, fatigued) and/or used idiosyncratic words to describe her mood states (e.g. numb, plastic).

OC reformulation

OC clients often deny emotional experience and may lack experience in labelling emotions or use idiosyncratic ways to describe their
feelings. Feelings of numbness or emptiness are commonly reported by those experiencing anhedonia or when feeling angry.

Borderline personality disorder criterion 4: inappropriate anger or difficulty controlling anger

Re-evaluation

Mrs G admitted that she sometimes has a bad temper, but that very few outside of her immediate family knew about her angry outbursts.
Recently she had become more irritable with small things (i.e. someone in public being discourteous or rude), but she does not display this.
OC reformulation

Angry outbursts or ‘emotional leakage’ are not uncommon for OC clients. Usually this only occurs in the presence of immediate family. They
can involve extreme temper tantrums with high use of sarcasm, foul language, and/or ridiculing; for example, during an argument with
a spouse. Occasionally these outburst can occur in public, most often pertaining to issues of morality or social etiquette (e.g. someone not
giving up their seat for a disabled person).


Borderline personality disorder criterion 5: transient, stress-related
paranoid ideation, delusions/severe dissociation
Re-evaluation
Mrs G reported feeling numb or devoid of emotions and having extreme worries that someone might learn about her secret angry outbursts.
She had firmly instructed family members not to discuss these ‘incidents’ outside of the family.
OC reformulation
OC clients strive to ‘keep up appearances’ and avoid being seen as ‘out of control’. They may exaggerate, cheat or lie if necessary to ensure that
they avoid social disapproval and/or that others recognize their good character.
RO-DBT treatment targets and interventions
Mrs G received the full-dosage of RO-DBT (i.e. ~30 weeks of individual therapy and skills training classes). Values, goals, themes and
treatment targets, listed in Table 28.5, helped guide individual therapy homework practices. Examples include the following:
1, Mrs G was encouraged to practise talking without rehearsing what she was going to say beforehand, at least twice every day.
2. She was encouraged to practise revealing her honest opinion about something to someone at least three times per week without sugar-
coating or trying to make it sound ‘cooperative’.
3. Mrs G practised saying aloud judgemental thoughts during individual therapy without minimizing their negativity or self-denigrating
herself for having them. At the same time, Mrs G worked to block harsh gossip about others using RO-DBT flexible-mind DARES skills to


oppose unhelpful envy, and use RO-DBT flexible-mind HEART skills to practise compassion, and forgiveness of self and others (Lynch,
in press).

4. Mrs G agreed to practise appreciating and valuing her desires to behave in a socially acceptable manner. Societies need individuals to
behave cooperatively in order to survive. At the same time, she agreed to practise the ‘art of non-cooperation’ by saying ‘no’ when she
really meant it (rather than maybe) and standing up for herself rather than automatically agreeing or complying in order to avoid
conflict.

5. Mrs G agreed to practise self-enquiry skills (such as those listed in Table 28.4) to help her let go of rigid beliefs that people (including
oneself) should always be polite or socially appropriate. She practised celebrating diversity and recognizing that it was arrogant for her
to assume that every person in the world should live according to her personal values or beliefs.

Treatment outcome

Over the course of treatment, Mrs G began to become increasingly aware of how her social-signalling functioned to keep her out of the tribe
or learn new things. Her practice of self-enquiry helped her to recognize that feeling invalidated or misunderstood was often more due to her
beliefs about the world than the actions of the other person. She began to re-conceptualize defensive-arousal as an opportunity for growth,
rather than automatically assuming that the world needs to change. For example, she learned to say ‘What can I learn from this conflictual
situation that is making me aroused and defensive?’ rather than ‘You need to validate me because I felt misunderstood by what you said.’
In RO-DBT it is proposed that we often learn the most from those areas of our life that we find most challenging. Near the end of treatment
she began to appreciate the importance of being suspicious of quick answers to self-enquiry or other-enquiry questions. She discovered that
quick responses were often disguised attempts to block feedback, stay the same or defend herself.


Table 28.5 Example of Mrs G's values, goals, themes and targets

Values & Goals Value: Marriage and close family relationshipsGoals: Closer relationship with sister; to start
dating again
Value: Self-sufficiency, competency, achievement, productive workGoals: To start working
full-time at the school where she is currently a teacher in order to contribute more to the
family’s income
Value: Fairness, kindness, respect and caring for othersGoals: To be more kind towards her
family, to offer help without expecting anything in return and to accept help from others

OC THEMES being targeted Aloof and distant relationships - addressing this is the highest treatment priority
Envy and bitterness
Inhibited emotional expression
Rigid and rule-governed behaviour

TREATMENT TARGETS on Diary Thoughts, Emotions, Sensations

Card Emotion = Anger/resentment - Linked to envy and bitterness theme, aloof and distant
relationships
Sensation = Exhaustion - Linked to rigid and rule-governed behaviour, aloof and distant
relationships, most often manifested by compulsive cleaning, and care-taking of others
Thought = ‘My little schemer’ - Judgemental thoughts and plans to ‘get back’ at someone she
feels has wronged her or been socially inappropriate, linked to envy and bitterness, revenge
fantasies, resentment, exhaustion, aloof and distant relationships


Emotion = Loneliness - Linked to aloof and distant relationships

Thought = ‘I’m not being appreciated!’—Linked to rule-governed behaviour, envy and

bitterness, and exhaustion

Thought = ‘Why don’t they know better?’—Linked to aloof and distant relationships

Social-signalling and other overt behaviours

‘Silent treatment’ - This is a social-signal linked to aloof and distant relationships,

resentment, and thoughts of not being appreciated. Client goes quiet when angry. Usually

denies she is doing this if asked, e.g. she uses it to punish her sister rather than tell her directly

what she is annoyed about.

‘Walking away’ - This is a social-signal linked to aloof and distant relationships. Most likely to

occur when there is conflict (e.g. an argument with her sister or a colleague at work).

‘Emotional leakage’— This is a social-signal most often linked to rigid and rule-governed

behaviour and moral certitude (e.g. might yell at someone on a bus who doesn’t give up their

seat for an elderly person).

‘Smiling when angry'— This is a social-signal linked to inhibited emotional expressions,

resentment, envy and bitterness, and rule-governed behaviour (e.g. always be polite).

‘Turning down help'— This is a social-signal linked to bitterness, resentment, exhaustion,

and sadness. Client will often refuse offers of help (e.g. offers of help in carrying groceries;

offers of help to grade papers).

‘Over-apologizing’—This is a social-signal linked to rigid and rule-governed behaviour

(always be polite), resentment, and exhaustion. Client was punished as a child when she said
cestesetisstistiisstisstistiistisssistisseisseisnee Something her mother felt was inappropriate. She now often believes she has done something


wrong if she says what she really believes to someone, leading to frequent and inappropriate
apologizing.
‘Gave honest opinion’— This is a social-signal linked to improving social-connectedness (i.e.
goal is to increase honest opinion giving rather than masking inner feelings).
Summary and concluding remarks
RO-DBT is a transdiagnostic evidence-based treatment approach for disorders characterized by an OC coping style, notably refractory
depression, DSM cluster A and C personality disorders, anorexia nervosa, and autism spectrum disorders. Maladaptive OC is characterized
by low receptivity and openness, low flexible-control, inhibited emotional expression and low emotional awareness, and lack of social
connectedness. OC clients show low trait openness to experience, high trait moral certitude, high trait compulsive striving, high trait detail-
focused processing, high trait emotion expression inhibition, low trait affiliation needs, high trait negative emotionality and low trait
positive emotionality.

OC is diagnosed by collating information from self-report measures of OC characteristics, interviews which identify OC-related DSM
diagnoses, the Overcontrolled Global Prototype Rating Scale, and the Clinician Rated OC Trait Rating Form. Common errors in assessing
OC include assuming that self-injury is exclusively seen among individuals with borderline personality disorder; assuming that strong
emotional expression only occurs in UC individuals; assuming that planned and spontaneous risk-taking are similar when assessing risk
aversion; assuming that reports of limited emotional experience means that OC clients are unemotional; and assuming that low reports of
distress mean that OC clients are not suffering.

RO-DBT is based on a neurobiosocial theory which proposes that an OC coping style develops and is maintained over time via reciprocal
transactions between bio-temperamental and genetic influences (nature), family and environmental factors (nurture) and self-control


tendencies (coping). RO-DBT neurobiosocial theory posits that social-signalling among humans is regulated by both top-down central-
cognitive regulatory factors and bottom-up processes associated with the peripheral nervous system. OC individuals have significant social-
signalling difficulties associated with their OC bio-temperaments and related traits. RO-DBT includes interventions targeting bio-
temperamental deficits via skills training designed to activate the ventral-vagal mediated social-safety system and develop a range of non-
verbal signalling strategies linked with prosocial and cooperative social-signals. The RO-DBT outpatient protocol consists of weekly
individual therapy sessions, weekly skills training classes, telephone coaching, and weekly therapist consultation team meetings (over a
period of about 30 weeks). The primary aim of RO-DBT is to decrease severe overcontrol, emotional loneliness and aloofness. Individual
therapy targets are arranged in the following hierarchy: (1) reduce life-threatening behaviours; (2) repair alliance-ruptures; and (3) reduce
OC maladaptive behaviours. For maladaptive behaviours, changing problematic social-signalling deficits that function to reduce social-
connectedness is prioritized over other problems in both individual therapy and skills training classes. In RO-DBT skills training classes
clients learn radical openness skills. These include relaxing rigid inhibitory self-control efforts, activating the ventral-vagal mediated social-
safety system, using nonverbal social-signalling skills linked to the mirror neuron system and the establishment of trust, allowing
vulnerable self-disclosure, practising self-enquiry in order to learn from new experiences, becoming willing to learn from feedback, and
reducing maladaptive social comparisons related to envy and bitterness. Radical openness is derived from Malamati Sufism which questions
self-centred desires for appreciation, power and self-aggrandizement. The practice of radical openness involves acknowledgement of
environmental stimuli that are disconfirming, purposeful self-enquiry into automatic emotional response tendencies, and flexibly
responding by doing what is needed to be effective in the moment in a manner that signals humility and accounts for the needs of others.

In many ways, RO-DBT is predicated on the idea that chronic axis I disorders and personality dysfunction are overlapping constructs. They
both entail rigid or habitual ways of coping, using OC or UC styles that are less amenable to environmental feedback. RO-DBT neurobiosocial
theory posits that bio-temperament is the driving force behind rigid OC and UC coping styles (Clark, 2005; Lynch et al., 2016). A person's


characteristic way of regulating their emotions and impulses and interpersonal relations make an enormous difference in determining the
most effective treatment targets and strategies to use when working with difficult-to-treat populations.

OC and UC coping styles are not simply opposite ends of a self-control continuum. The neurobiosocial theory underlying RO-DBT proposes
that these styles are multidimensional. It posits that socio-emotional functioning is influenced by a wide range of factors including
individual differences in bio-temperament, family-environmental experiences, and habitual perceptual and regulatory factors. RO-DBT
uniquely exploits bottom-up peripheral nervous system processes to regulate OC bio-temperamental perceptual and regulatory biases by,
for example, teaching skills to stimulate a neural substrate associated with social-safety and desires to affiliate (i.e. PNS-VVC). RO-DBT also
introduces a unique mechanism of therapeutic change by linking the communicative and facilitative functions of emotional expression to
the formation of close social bonds. This translates into novel social-signalling skills designed to enhance social connectedness that take
advantage of the mirror neuron system and our natural tendencies to micro-mimic others, a distinctive feature of RO-DBT differentiating it
from other treatments.

Further reading for clinicians
Lynch, T. R., Gray, K.L.H., Hempel, R. J., Titley, M., Chen, E. Y., & O’Mahen, H. A. (2013). Radically open-dialectical behaviour therapy for
adult anorexia nervosa: feasibility and outcomes from an inpatient program. BMC psychiatry, 13, 17. doi:10.1186/1471-244x- 13-293.
Lynch, T. R.. Hempel, R. J. & Dunkley, C, (2015). Radically open-dialectical behavior therapy for disorders of over-control: Signaling
matters. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 69(2), 141-162.
Lynch, T. R., Lazarus, S., & Cheavens, J. S. (2015). Mindfulness interventions for emotion dysregulation disorders: From self-control to
self-regulation. In K. Brown, D. Creswell, & R. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of Mindfulness: Theory, Research and Practice (pp. 329-347). New
York: Guilford Press.


Further reading for clients
Lynch, T.R, (in press). Radically Open Dialectical Behaviour Therapy for Disorders of Overcontrol. New York: Guilford Press.

Websites
RO-DBT: http://www.radicallyopen.net/

References
Adolphs, R. (2002). Recognizing emotion from facial expressions: psychological and neurological mechanisms. Behavioural and
Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews, 1(1), 21-62.
Adolphs, R. (2008). Fear, faces, and the human amygdala. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 18(2), 166-172.
Aldao, A., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Schweizer, S, (2010). Emotion-regulation strategies across psychopathology: A meta-analytic review.
Clinical Psychology Review, 30(2), 217-237.
Aloi. M.. Rania, M., Caroleo, M., Bruni, Au Palmieri, A. Cauteruccio, M.A., ... Segura-Garcia, C. (2015). Decision making, central coherence
and set-shifting: A comparison between binge eating disorder, anorexia nervosa and healthy controls. BMC Psychiatry, 15. doi:10.1186/
$12888-015-0395-z
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV).
Arlington, VA: Author.


American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition-Text Revision (DSM-
1V-TR). Arlington, VA: Author.

American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). Arlington,
VA: Author.

Anderluh, M., Tchanturia, K., Rabe-Hesketh, S., Collier, D., & Treasure, J. (2009). Lifetime course of eating disorders: design and validity
testing of a new strategy to define the eating disorders phenotype. Psychological Medicine, 39(01), 105-114.

Ashton, M. C., Lee, K., & Goldberg, L. R. (2004). A hierarchical analysis of 1,710 English personality-descriptive adjectives. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 87(5), 707.

Bagby, R. M., Parker, J. D., & Taylor, G. J. (1994). The twenty-item Toronto Alexithymia Scale-I. Item selection and cross-validation of the
factor structure. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 38(1), 23-32.

Bernieri, F. J. (1988). Coordinated movement and rapport in teacher-student interactions. Journal of Nonverbal Behaviour, 12(2), 120-
138.

Berridge, K., & Winkielman, P. (2003). What is an unconscious emotion? (The case for unconscious “liking”). Cognition & Emotion, 17(2),
181-211.

Boone, R. T., & Buck, R. (2003). Emotional expressivity and trustworthiness: The role of nonverbal behaviour in the evolution of
cooperation. Journal of Nonverbal Behaviour, 27(3), 163-182

Bulik, C. M., Tozzi, F., Anderson, C., Mazzeo, S. E., Aggen, S., & Sullivan, P. F. (2003). The relation between eating disorders and components
of perfectionism. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(2), 366-368.

Butler, E. A., Egloff, B., Wilhelm, F. H., Smith, N. C., Erickson, E. A., & Gross, J. J. (2003). The social consequences of expressive suppression.
Emotion, 3(1), 48.


Calvo, R., Lazaro, L., Castro-Fornieles, J., Font, E., Moreno, E., & Toro, J. (2009). Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder traits and
personality dimensions in parents of children with obsessive-compulsive disorder. European Psychiatry, 24(3), 201-206.

Candrian, M., Schwartz, F., Farabaugh, A, Perlis, R. H., Ehlert, U., & Fava, M. (2008). Personality disorders and perceived stress in major
depressive disorder. Psychiatry Research, 160(2), 184-191

Carroll, L. (1865/2000). Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Peterborough, ON: Broadview Press.

Casper, R. C. (1990). Personality features of women with good outcome from restricting anorexia nervosa. Psychosomatic Medicine, 52(2),
156-170.

Chen, E. Y., Segal, K., Weissman, J,, Zeffiro, T. A., Gallop, R., Linehan, M. M., ... Lynch, T. R. (2015). Adapting Dialectical Behaviour Therapy
For Outpatient Adult Anorexia Nervosa-A Pilot Study. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48(1), 123-132.

Claes, L., Jiménez-Murcia, $., Santamaria, J. J., Moussa, M. B., Sanchez, I, Forcano, L., ... Nielsen, J. (2012). The facial and subjective
emotional reaction in response to a video game designed to train emotional regulation (Playmancer). European Eating Disorders Review,
20(6), 484-489.

Claes, L., Klonsky, E. D., Muehlenkamp, J., Kuppens, P., & Vandereycken, W. (2010). The affect-regulation function of nonsuicidal self-
injury in eating-disordered patients: which affect states are regulated? Comprehensive Psychiatry, 51(4), 386-392

Clark, L. A. (2005). Temperament as a unifying basis for personality and psychopathology. journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114(4), 505.
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1991). Tripartite model of anxiety and depression: psychometric evidence and taxonomic implications.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100(3), 316.

Clifford, S. M., Hudry, K., Elsabbagh, M., Charman, T., Johnson, M. H., & Team, B. (2013). Temperament in the first 2 years of life in infants
at high-risk for autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 43(3), 673-686.

Coid, J., Yang, M., Tyrer, P., Roberts, A., & Ullrich, S. (2006). Prevalence and correlates of personality disorder in Great Britain. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 188(5), 423-431.


Crane, A. M., Roberts, M. E., & Treasure, J. (2007). Are obsessive-compulsive personality traits associated with a poor outcome in anorexia
nervosa? A systematic review of randomized controlled trials and naturalistic outcome studies. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
40(7), 581-588.

Dan-Glauser, E. S., & Gross, J. J. (2011). The temporal dynamics of two response-focused forms of emotion regulation: Experiential,
expressive, and autonomic consequences. Psychophysiology, 48(9), 1309-1322.

Davies, H., Schmidt, U., Stahl, D., & Tchanturia, K. (2011). Evoked facial emotional expression and emotional experience in people with
anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 44(6), 531-539.

Depue, R. A., & Morrone-Strupinsky, J. V. (2005). A neurobehavioural model of affiliative bonding: Implications for conceptualizing a
human trait of affiliation. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 28(3), 313-349.

Disney, W. (1951). Alice in Wonderland (film). Burbank, CA: Disney Productions.

Durbin, C. E., Klein, D. N., Hayden, E. P., Buckley, M. E., & Moerk, K. C. (2005). Temperamental emotionality in preschoolers and parental
mood disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114(1), 28.

Ekselius, L., Tillfors, M., Furmark, T., & Fredrikson, M. (2001). Personality disorders in the general population: DSM-IV and ICD-10
defined prevalence as related to sociodemographic profile. Personality and Individual Differences, 30(2), 311-320.

English, T., & John, O. P. (2013). Understanding the social effects of emotion regulation: The mediating role of authenticity for individual
differences in suppression. Emotion, 13(2), 314.

English, T., John, O. P., Srivastava, S., & Gross, J. J. (2012). Emotion regulation and peer-rated social functioning: A 4-year longitudinal
study. Journal of Research in Personality, 46(6), 780-784.

Eskedal, G. A., & Demetri, J. M. (2006). Etiology and treatment of cluster C personality disorders. journal of Mental Health Counselling,
28(1), 1-17.


Evans, C., Connell, J., Barkham, M., Margison, F., McGrath, G., Mellor-Clark, J., & Audin, K. (2002). Towards a standardised brief outcome
measure: psychometric properties and utility of the CORE—OM. British fournal of Psychiatry, 180(1), 51-60.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., & Welch, S. L. (1999). Risk factors for anorexia nervosa: three integrated case-control comparisons.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 56(5), 468-476.

Fava, M., Farabaugh, A. H., Sickinger, A. H., Wright, E., Alpert, J. E., Sonawalla, S., ... Worthington, J. J., II. (2002). Personality disorders
and depression. Psychological Medicine: A Journal of Research in Psychiatry and the Allied Sciences, 32(6), 1049-1057.

First, M., Gibbon, M., Spitzer, R., Williams, J., & Benjamin, L. (1997). Structured clinical interview for DSM-IV personality disorders (SCID-II):
Interview and questionnaire. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.

First, M. B., Williams, J.BW., Karg, R. S., & Spitzer, R. L. (2015). Structured Clinical interview for DSM-5. Clinical Version. Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Press.

Forbush, K., & Watson, D. (2006). Emotional inhibition and personality traits: A comparison of women with anorexia, bulimia, and
normal controls. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 18(2), 115-121.

Forkmann, T., Scherer, A., Bocker, M., Pawelzik, M., Gauggel, S., & Glaesmer, H. (2014). The relation of cognitive reappraisal and
expressive suppression to suicidal ideation and suicidal desire. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behaviour. doi:10.1111/sltb.12076
Fournier, J. C., DeRubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., & Gallop, R. (2009). Prediction of response to medication and
cognitive therapy in the treatment of moderate to severe depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(4), 775-787.
Gallagher, N.G., South, S. C., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2003). Attentional coping style in obsessive-compulsive personality disorder: A test of the
intolerance of uncertainty hypothesis. Personality and Individual Differences, 34(1), 41-57.

Geller, J., Cockell, S. J., Hewitt, P. L., Goldner, E. M., & Flett, G. L. (2000). Inhibited expression of negative emotions and interpersonal
orientation in anorexia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 28(1), 8-19.


Ghaziuddin, M., Tsai, L., Naylor, M., & Ghaziuddin, N. (1991). Mood disorder in a group of self-cutting adolescents. Acta
Paedopsychiatrica, 55(2), 103-105

Gilbert, P., McEwan, K., Mitra, R., Richter, A., Franks, L., Mills, A., ... Gale, C. (2009). An exploration of different types of positive affect in
students and in patients with bipolar disorder. Clinical Neuropsychiatry, 6(4), 135-143.

Goldberg, L. R., & Kilkowski, J. M. (1985). The prediction of semantic consistency in self-descriptions: Characteristics of persons and of
terms that affect the consistency of responses to synonym and antonym pairs. journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48(1), 82.
Grant, B. F., Hasin, D. S., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Ruan, W., & Pickering, R. P. (2004). Prevalence, correlates, and disability
of personality disorders in the United States: results from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, 65(7), 948-958.

Gross, J. J., & John, O. P. (2003a). Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes: implications for affect, relationships, and
well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(2), 348.

Gross, J. J., & John, O. P. (2003b). Individual differences in two emotion regulation processes: implications for affect, relationships, and
well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(2), 348.

Haga, S. M., Kraft, P., & Corby, E. K. (2009). Emotion regulation: Antecedents and well-being outcomes of cognitive reappraisal and
expressive suppression in cross-cultural samples. Journal of Happiness Studies, 10(3), 271-291.

Halmi, K. A., Sunday, S. R., Strober, M., Kaplan, A., Woodside, D. B., Fichter, M., ... Kaye, W. H. (2000). Perfectionism in anorexia nervosa:
variation by clinical subtype, obsessionality, and pathological eating behaviour. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157(11), 1799-1805.
Halmi, K. A., Tozzi, F., Thornton, L. M., Crow, S., Fichter, M. M., Kaplan, A. S., ... Mitchell, J. E. (2005). The relation among perfectionism,
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder in individuals with eating disorders. International Journal
of Eating Disorders, 38(4), 371-374


Happé, F., & Frith, U. (2006). The weak coherence account: Detail-focused cognitive style in autism spectrum disorders. journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 36, 5-25.

Hess, U., & Blairy, S. (2001). Facial mimicry and emotional contagion to dynamic emotional facial expressions and their influence on
decoding accuracy. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 40(2), 129-141.

Hintikka, J., Tolmunen, T., Rissanen, M.-L., Honkalampi, K., Kylm4, J., & Laukkanen, E. (2009). Mental disorders in self-cutting
adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 44(5), 464-467.

Jackson, H. J., & Burgess, P. M. (2000). Personality disorders in the community: A report from the Australian National Survey of Mental
Health and Wellbeing. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 35(12), 31-538.

Kaye, W. (2008). Neurobiology of anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Physiology & Behaviour, 94(1), 121-135.

Kendler, K. S., Prescott, C. A., Myers, J., & Neale, M. C. (2003). The structure of genetic and environmental risk factors for common
psychiatric and substance use disorders in men and women. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(9), 929-937.

Keogh, K., Booth R, & Baird, K., e. a. (in preparation). “Radical Openness” a DBT-informed skills group for emotional over-control. A
controlled trial with 3 month follow up.

Kernis, M. H., & Goldman, B. M. (2006). A multicomponent conceptualization of authenticity: Theory and research. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 283-357.

Klein, D.N., Riso, L. P., Donaldson, S. K., Schwartz, J. E., Anderson, R. L., Quimette, P.C., ... Aronson, T. A. (1995). Family study of early-
onset dysthymia: Mood and personality disorders in relatives of outpatients with dysthymia and episodic major depression and normal
controls. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52(6), 487-496.

Klonsky, E. D. (2007). The functions of deliberate self-injury: A review of the evidence. Clinical Psychology Review, 27(2), 226-239
Klonsky, E. D., & Olino, T. M. (2008). Identifying clinically distinct subgroups of self-injurers among young adults: a latent class analysis.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76(1), 22.


Klonsky, E. D., Oltmanns, T. F., & Turkheimer, E. (2003). Deliberate self-harm in a nonclinical population: Prevalence and psychological
correlates. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1608), 1501-1508.

Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J.B.W. (2001). The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. Journal of General
Internal Medicine, 16(9), 606-613.

Krueger, R. F. (1999). The structure of common mental disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56(10), 921-926.

Krueger, R. F., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., & Silva, PA. (1998). The structure and stability of common mental disorders (DSM-III-R): A
longitudinal-epidemiological study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107(2), 216-227

Krueger, R. F.,, Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., Silva, P.A., & McGee, R. (1996). Personality traits are differentially linked to mental disorders: a
multitrait-multidiagnosis study of an adolescent birth cohort. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105(3), 299.

Lakin, J. L., & Chartrand, T. L. (2003). Using nonconscious behavioural mimicry to create affiliation and rapport. Psychological Science,
14(4), 334-339.

Lang, K., Lopez, C., Stahl, D., Tchanturia, K., & Treasure, J. (2014). Central coherence in eating disorders: An updated systematic review
and meta-analysis. World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 15(8), 586-598.

Lang, K., & Tchanturia, K. (2014). A systematic review of central coherence in children and adolescents with Anorexia Nervosa. Journal
of Child and Adolescent Behaviour, 2 (140). doi.10.4172/jcalb.1000140

Larsen, J. K., Vermulst, A. A., Geenen, R., van Middendorp, H., English, T., Gross, J. J., ... Engels, R. C. (2013). Emotion regulation in
adolescence a prospective study of expressive suppression and depressive symptoms. The Journal of Early Adolescence, 33(2), 184-200.
Lenzenweger, M. F. (2008). Epidemiology of personality disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 31(3), 395-403.

Lilenfeld, L. R., Wonderlich, S., Riso, L. P., Crosby, R., & Mitchell, J. (2006). Eating disorders and personality: A methodological and
empirical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 26(3), 299-320.

Linehan, M. (1993a). Cognitive-Behavioural Treatment of Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford Press.


Linehan, M. M. (1993b). Skills Training Manual for Treating Borderline Personality Disorder. New York: Guilford Press.

Linehan, M. M. (2014). DBT Skills Training Manual (Second Edition). New York: Guilford Press.

Lopez, C., Tchanturia, K., Stahl, D., & Treasure, J. (2008). Central coherence in eating disorders: A systematic review. Psychological
Medicine, 38(10), 1393-1404.

Lopez, C., Tchanturia, K., Stahl, D., & Treasure, J. (2009). Weak central coherence in eating disorders: A step towards looking for an
endophenotype of eating disorders. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 31(1), 117-125.

Loranger, A. W., Janca, A., & Sartorius, N. (1997). Assessment and Diagnosis of Personality Disorders: The ICD-10 International Personality
Disorder Examination (IPDE). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Losh, M., Adolphs, R., Poe, M. D., Couture, S., Penn, D., Baranek, G. T., & Piven, J. (2009). Neuropsychological profile of autism and the broad
autism phenotype. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(5), 518-526.

Lugnegard, T., Hallerback, M. U., & Gillberg, C. (2012). Personality disorders and autism spectrum disorders: what are the connections?
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 53(4), 333-340.

Lynch, M. P. (2004). Truth and multiple realizability. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 82(3), 384-408.

Lynch, T. R. (2014). Reframed-Refractory Depression: Mechanisms and Effectiveness of Radically Open-Dialectical Behaviour Therapy: A
Randomised Controlled Trial. Retrieved 29/05/2015, from http://www.controlled-trials.com/ISRCTN85784627/

Lynch, T. R. (in press). Radically Open Dialectical Behaviour Therapy for Disorders of Overcontrol. New York: Guilford Press.

Lynch, T. R., & Cheavens, J. S. (2008). Dialectical behaviour therapy for comorbid personality disorders. fournal of Clinical Psychology,
64(2), 154-167.

Lynch, T. R., Cheavens, J. S., Cukrowicz, K. C., Thorp, S. R., Bronner, L., & Beyer, J. (2007). Treatment of older adults with co-morbid
personality disorder and depression: a dialectical behaviour therapy approach. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22(2), 131-
143.


Lynch, T. R., & Cozza, C. (2009). Non-suicidal self injury: Behavioural perspectives. In M. K. Nock (Ed.), Understanding Non-suicidal Self-
injury: Origins, Assessment, and Treatment. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Lynch, T. R., Gray, K.L.H., Hempel, R. J., Titley, M., Chen, E. Y., & O'Mahen, H. A. (2013). Radically open-dialectical behaviour therapy for
adult anorexia nervosa: feasibility and outcomes from an inpatient program. BMC psychiatry, 13, 17. doi:10.1186/1471-244x-13-293
Lynch, T. R., Hempel, R. J., & Clark, L. A. (2016). Promoting radical openness and flexible control. In W. J. Livesley (Ed.), Integrated
Treatment for Personality Disorder (pp. 325-344). New York: Guilford.

Lynch, T. R., Hempel, R. J., & Dunkley, C. (2015). Radically Open-Dialectical Behaviour Therapy for Disorders of Overcontrol: Signalling
Matters. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 69(2), 141-162.

Lynch, T. R., Morse, J.Q., Mendelson, T., & Robins, C. J. (2003). Dialectical behaviour therapy for depressed older adults—A randomized
pilot study. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 11(1), 33-45.

Maclean, J. C., Xu, H., French, M. T., & Ettner, S. L. (2014). Mental health and high-cost health care utilization: New evidence from axis II
disorders. Health Services Research, 49(2), 683-704.

Mervielde, I, De Clercq, B., De Fruyt, F., & Van Leeuwen, K. (2005). Temperament, personality, and developmental psychopathology as
childhood antecedents of personality disorders. journal of Personality Disorders, 19(2), 171-201.

Milad, M. R., Wright, C. 1, Orr, S. P., Pitman, R. K., Quirk, G. J., & Rauch, S. L. (2007). Recall of fear extinction in humans activates the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus in concert. Biological Psychiatry, 62(5), 446-454.

Mineka, S., Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1998). Comorbidity of anxiety and unipolar mood disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 49(1),
377-412.

Montgomery, K. J., & Haxby, J. V. (2008). Mirror neuron system differentially activated by facial expressions and social hand gestures: a
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(10), 1866-1877.


Moore, S. A., Zoellner, L. A., & Mollenholt, N. (2008). Are expressive suppression and cognitive reappraisal associated with stress-related
symptoms? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46(9), 993-1000.

Newton-Howes, G., Tyrer, P., & Johnson, T. (2006). Personality disorder and the outcome of depression: meta-analysis of published
studies. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188(1), 13-20.

Nock, M. K. (2009). Why do people hurt themselves? New insights into the nature and functions of self-injury. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 18(2), 78-83.

Nock, M. K,, Joiner, T. E., Jr, Gordon, K. H., Lloyd-Richardson, E., & Prinstein, M. J. (2006). Non-suicidal self-injury among adolescents:
Diagnostic correlates and relation to suicide attempts. Psychiatry Research, 144(1), 65-72.

Oleski, J., Cox, B., Robinson, J., & Grant, B. (2012). The predictive validity of cluster C personality disorders on the persistence of major
depression in the national epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related conditions. Journal of personality disorders, 26(3), 322-333.
Paulhus, D. (1988). Balanced inventory of desirable responding (BIDR). Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. Measures Package, p. 41.
Pinto, A. (2011). Introducing the POPS (Pathological Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Scale): Derivation and Exploratory Factor Analysis.
Paper presented at the Annual meeting of the Society for Personality Assessment, Cambridge, MA

Porges, S. W. (1995). Orienting in a defensive world: Mammalian modifications of our evolutionary heritage. A polyvagal theory.
Psychophysiology, 32(4), 301-318.

Porges, S. W. (2001). The polyvagal theory: phylogenetic substrates of a social nervous system. International Journal of Psychophysiology,
42(2), 123-146.

Reas, D. L., Ra, @., Karterud, S., Hummelen, B., & Pedersen, G. (2013). Eating disorders in a large clinical sample of men and women with
personality disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 46(8), 801-809.

Richards, J. M. (2004). The cognitive consequences of concealing feelings. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13(4), 131-134


Riso, L. P., Blandino, J. A., Penna, S., Dacey, S., Grant, M. M., Du Toit, P.L., ... Ulmer, C. S. (2003). Cognitive aspects of chronic depression.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112(1), 72-80.

Riso, L. P., Du Toit, P., Blandino, J. A., Penna, S., Dacey, S., Duin, J. S.,... Ulmer, C. S. (2003). Cognitive aspects of chronic depression. journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 112(1), 72.

Roberts, M. E., Tchanturia, K., Stahl, D., Southgate, L., & Treasure, J. (2007). A systematic review and meta-analysis of set-shifting ability
in eating disorders. Psychological Medicine, 37(08), 1075-1084.

Ronald, A., Happé, F., & Plomin, R. (2005). The genetic relationship between individual differences in social and nonsocial behaviours
characteristic of autism. Developmental Science, 8(5), 444-458.

Salzman, L. (1980). Treatment of the Obsessive Personality: New York: Aronson.

Samuel, D. B., & Gore, W. L. (2012). Maladaptive variants of conscientiousness and agreeableness. Journal of personality, 80(6), 1669-
1696.

Samuel, D. B., & Griffin, S. A. (2015). Obsessive compulsive personality disorder. In R. Cautin & S. Lilienfeld (Eds.), Encyclopaedia of
Clinical Psychology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.

Samuel, D. B., & Widiger, T. A. (2008). A meta-analytic review of the relationships between the five-factor model and DSM-IV-TR
personality disorders: A facet level analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 28(8), 1326-1342

Samuel, D. B., & Widiger, T. A. (2010). A comparison of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder scales. fournal of Personality
Assessment, 92(3), 232-240.

Samuel, D. B., & Widiger, T. A. (2011). Conscientiousness and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Personality Disorders: Theory,
Research, and Treatment, 2(3), 161.

Samuels, J. (2011). Personality disorders: epidemiology and public health issues. International Review of Psychiatry, 23(3), 223-233.


Schneider, K. G., Hempel, R. J., & Lynch, T. R. (2013). That “poker face” just might lose you the game! The impact of expressive
suppression and mimicry on sensitivity to facial expressions of emotion. Emotion, 13(5), 852

Schraub, E. M., Turgut, S., Clavairoly, V., & Sonntag, K. (2013). Emotion regulation as a determinant of recovery experiences and well-
being: A day-level study. International Journal of Stress Management, 20(4), 309.

Schug, J., Matsumoto, D., Horita, Y., Yamagishi, T., & Bonnet, K. (2010). Emotional expressivity as a signal of cooperation. Evolution and
Human Behaviour, 31(2), 87-94.

Schultz, P., & Searleman, A. (2002). Rigidity of thought and behaviour: 100 years of research. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology
Monographs, 128(2), 165-207.

Schwartz, C. B., Henderson, H. A., Inge, A. P, Zahka, N. E., Coman, D. C., Kojkowski, N. M., ... Mundy, P. C. (2009). Temperament
as a predictor of symptomatology and adaptive functioning in adolescents with high-functioning autism. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 39(6), 842-855.

Selby, E. A., Bender, T. W., Gordon, K. H., Nock, M. K., & Joiner, T. E., Jr. (2012). Non-suicidal self-injury (NSSI) disorder: A preliminary
study. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 3(2), 167.

Serpell, L., Livingstone, A., Neiderman, M., & Lask, B. (2002). Anorexia nervosa: Obsessive-compulsive disorder, obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder, or neither? Clinical Psychology Review, 22(S), 647-669.

Shapiro, D. (1965). Neurotic Styles. New York: Basic Books.

Shedler, J., Mayman, M., & Manis, M. (1993). The illusion of mental health. American Psychologist, 48(11), 1117.

Shedler, J., Mayman, M., & Manis, M. (1994). More illusions. American Psychologist, 49, 974-976.

Soto, J. A., Perez, C. R., Kim, Y.-H., Lee, E. A., & Minnick, M. R. (2011). Is expressive suppression always associated with poorer
psychological functioning? A cross-cultural comparison between European Americans and Hong Kong Chinese. Emotion, 11(6), 1450.


Srinivasagam, N. M., Kaye, W. H., Plotnicov, K. H., Greeno, C., Weltzin, T. E., & Rao, R. (1995). Persistent perfectionism, symmetry, and
exactness after long-term recovery from anorexia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152(11), 1630-1634.

Srivastava, S., Tamir, M., McGonigal, K. M., John, O. P., & Gross, J. J. (2009). The social costs of emotional suppression: a prospective study
of the transition to college. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(4), 883

Steenkamp, M. M., Suvak, M. K., Dickstein, B. D., Shea, M. T., & Litz, B. T. (2015). Emotional Functioning in Obsessive-Compulsive
Personality Disorder: Comparison to Borderline Personality Disorder and Healthy Controls. journal of Personality Disorders, 1-15.
Steketee, G., & Frost, R. (2003). Compulsive hoarding: current status of the research. Clinical Psychology Review, 23(7), 905-927.

Stel, M., & Vonk, R. (2010). Mimicry in social interaction: Benefits for mimickers, mimickees, and their interaction. British Journal of
Psychology, 101(2), 311-323

Strober, M., Freeman, R., Lampert, C., & Diamond, J. (2007). The association of anxiety disorders and obsessive compulsive personality
disorder with anorexia nervosa: Evidence from a family study with discussion of nosological and neurodevelopmental implications.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40(S3), S46-S51.

Suda, M., Brooks, S. J., Giampietro, V., Uher, R., Mataix-Cols, D., Brammer, M. J., ... Campbell, I. C. (2014). Provocation of Symmetry/
Ordering Symptoms in Anorexia nervosa: A Functional Neuroimaging Study. PLoS One, 9(5), e97998.

Tchanturia, K., Morris, R., Anderluh, M. B., Collier, D. A., Nikolaou, V., & Treasure, J. (2004). Set shifting in anorexia nervosa: an
examination before and after weight gain, in full recovery and relationship to childhood and adult OCPD traits. journal of Psychiatric
Research, 38(5), 545-552.

Tokley, M., & Kemps, E. (2007). Preoccupation with detail contributes to poor abstraction in women with anorexia nervosa. Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 29(7), 734-741

Torgersen, S. (2005). Epidemiology. In J. M. Oldham, A. E. Skodol & D. S. Bender (Eds.), Textbook of Personality Disorders (pp. 129-141).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.


Torgersen, S., Kringlen, E., & Cramer, V. (2001). The prevalence of personality disorders in a community sample. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 58(6), 590-596.

Toussulis, Y. (2011). Sufism and the Way of Blame: Hidden Sources of a Sacred Psychology. Wheaton, IL: Quest Books.

Van der Gaag, C., Minderaa, R. B., & Keysers, C. (2007). Facial expressions: what the mirror neuron system can and cannot tell us. Social
Neuroscience, 2(3-4), 179-222.

Vazsonyi, A. T., & Klanjéek, R. (2008). A test of self-control theory across different socioeconomic strata. Justice Quarterly, 25(1), 101-
131.

Villemarette-Pittman, N. R., Stanford, M. S., Greve, K. W., Houston, R. J., & Mathias, C. W. (2004). Obsessive - Compulsive Personality
Disorder and Behavioural Disinhibition. journal of Psychology, 138(1), 5-22.

Vollebergh, W. A., ledema, J., Bijl, R. V., de Graaf, R., Smit, F., & Ormel, J. (2001). The structure and stability of common mental disorders:
the NEMESIS study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(6), 597-603.

Vrana, S. R., & Gross, D. (2004). Reactions to facial expressions: effects of social context and speech anxiety on responses to neutral,
anger, and joy expressions. Biological Psychology, 66(1), 63-78.

Vuijk, R., de Nijs, P., Vitale, S., Simons-Sprong, M., & Hengeveld, M. (2011). [Personality traits in adults with autism spectrum disorders
measured by means of the Temperament and Character Inventory]. Tijdschrift voor psychiatrie, 54(8), 699-707.

Wainer, A. L., Ingersoll, B. R., & Hopwood, C. J. (2011). The structure and nature of the broader autism phenotype in a non-clinical
sample. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioural Assessment, 33(4), 459-469.

Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: the disposition to experience aversive emotional states. Psychological Bulletin,
96(3), 465.

Watters, J. E., & Malouf, J. M. (2012). Perceived personality traits of individuals with anorexia nervosa. Clinical Psychologist, 16(3), 118-
122.


Westen, D., DeFife, J. A., Bradley, B., & Hilsenroth, M. J. (2010). Prototype personality diagnosis in clinical practice: A viable alternative for
DSM-S and ICD-11. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 41(6), 482.

Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., Lubman, D. 1, & Yiicel, M. (2006). The neurobiological basis of temperament: towards a better understanding of
psychopathology. Neuroscience & Biobehavioural Reviews, 30(4), 511-525.

wild, B., Erb, M., & Bartels, M. (2001). Are emotions contagious? Evoked emotions while viewing emotionally expressive faces: quality,
quantity, time course and gender differences. Psychiatry Research, 102(2), 109-124.

Wonderlich, S., Lilenfeld, L., Riso, L., Engel, S., & Mitchell, J. (2005). Personality and anorexia nervosa. The International journal of Eating
Disorders, 37, S68.

Wonderlich, S., & Mitchell, J. E. (2001). The role of personality in the onset of eating disorders and treatment implications. Psychiatric
Clinics of North America, 24(2), 249-258.

Wong, S. W., Massé, N., Kimmerly, D. S., Menon, R. S., & Shoemaker, J. K. (2007). Ventral medial prefrontal cortex and cardiovagal control
in conscious humans. Neuroimage, 35(2), 698-708.

Yovel, I., Revelle, W., & Mineka, S. (2005). Who sees trees before forest? the obsessive-compulsive style of visual attention. Psychological
Science, 16(2), 123-129.

Zhang, S., Hu, S., Chao, H. H., Ide, J. S., Luo, X., Farr, O. M., & Chiang-shan, R. L. (2013). Ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the regulation
of physiological arousal. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, nst064.

Zimmerman, M., Rothschild, L., & Chelminski, I. (2005). The prevalence of DSM-IV personality disorders in psychiatric outpatients.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(10), 1911-1918.

Zucker, N. L., Losh, M., Bulik, C. M., LaBar, K. S., Piven, J, & Pelphrey, K. A. (2007). Anorexia nervosa and autism spectrum disorders:
guided investigation of social cognitive endophenoty pes. Psychological Bulletin, 133(6), 976


Appendix 28A Assessing Styles of Coping measure
Only a subset of the Assessing Styles of Coping measure is presented here. The full scale can be found in Lynch (in press).

Instructions. Read each word-pair in each row and place a checkmark next to the word that best describes you. Make sure you pick only
ONE word or phrase in each row. If you are unsure which word best describes you, imagine what your friends or family members might say
about you. If neither of the words describe you - pick the one that is the closest to how you would describe yourself. Make sure you pick one
word from each row.

A B

Impulsive © Deliberate o

Impractical 0 Practical o

Naive 9 Worldly o

Vulnerable o Aloof o

Risky o Prudent )

Talkative i} Quiet a

Disobedient 0 Dutiful o

Act without thinking 0 Think before acting )

Animated oO Restrained o


Changeable mood 9 Stable mood o

Inattentive o Attentive o

Short-lived 0 Enduring o

Perky © Despondent i)

Passionate o Indifferent o

Immediate gratification © Delay gratification a

TOTAL score A TOTAL score B

Note: This scale measures overall personality styles. A high score on cither subscale does not necessarily indicate maladaptive overcontrolled or maladaptive

undercontrolled coping. For assessing maladaptive overcontrolled coping, the OC Self-Report Trait Scale should be used.
Appendix 28B OC Trait Rating Scale
Only a subset of the OC Trait Rating Scale is presented here. The full scale can be found in Lynch (in press).

Instructions. Listed below are a number of statements. Please read them carefully and decide how much each statement applies to you
according to your present and past experiences. In completing this questionnaire, it is important to understand that there are no ‘right’
or ‘wrong’ answers. We are interested in finding out how people think, feel or behave across different settings and circumstances. Use the
following 6-point scale to rate the extent you agree or disagree with each statement.

1 Disagree 2 Disagree 3 Disagree 4 Agree 5 Agree strongly 6 Agreecompletely Use by
completely strongly somewhat somewhat assessor


S  Lalways make time for enjoyment or fun 1 2 3 4 s 6
7 My dream life involves having a new experience every day 1 2 3 4 5 6
9 — loften feel detached from others 1 2 3 4 s 6
10 If laminvited toa party I usually attend out of obligation, not because I expect it to be 1 2 3 4 5 6
fun

13 Lam sometimes so open to new ideas that people have described me as naive or gullible 1 2 3 4 5 6
14 Having to be around others for long periods of time is exhausting 1 2 3 4 5 6
15 In life, there is a set of rules and principles that one should always adhere to 1 2 3 4 Ss 6
16 Lam proud of my ability to tolerate pain or distress in order to achieve a goal 1 2 3 4 5 6
17 Most things in life don't work out 1 2 3 4 5 6
18 Loften notice errors that other people miss 1 2 3 4 5 6
19 Very few people know that I can have an explosive temper 1 2 3 4 5 6
20 My anxiety often interferes with my ability to hear what another person is saying 1 2 3 4 s 6
23 Loften mask or hide my inner feelings from others 1 2 3 4 5 6
24 [feel content with my life 1 2 3 4 5 6
Note. This measure assesses maladaptive OC coping. OC chents are expected to score high on both the Assessing Styles of Coping measure in Appendix
28A and the OC maladaptive trait rating scale in Appendix 26B.

Appendix 28C The Overcontrolled Global Prototype Rating Scale

Only a subset of the scale is presented here. A complete description and the full rating scale can be found in Lynch (in press).


Description: This post-interview prototype rating scale assesses four core OC deficits: (1) Receptivity and Openness, (2) Flexible-
Responding, (3) Emotional Expression and Awareness and (4) Social Connectedness and Intimacy - Each deficit has two subheadings.
Instructions for use: AFTER COMPLETING A CLINICAL INTERVIEW, the interviewer should read the description under each subheading
below and rate the extent the client ‘matches’ the description as a whole using the 5-point rating scale. The idea is to evaluate each subfeature
as a whole, rather than counting individual symptoms. RATINGS SHOULD BE DONE AFTER THE CLIENT HAS LEFT THE INTERVIEW ROOM.
Notes:
1. Average time to complete all ratings = ~5 minutes.
2. OC SUBTYPES are rated only if the client has scored 17 or high is on the global rating scale.
3. A supplemental scoring summary sheet is provided which can be incorporated into the client's medical record.
1. Deficits in receptivity and openness.
a. Hypervigilant for stimuli perceived to be threatening, critical, discrepant, disorganized, or lacking symmetry.

i. He/she is alert to the potential for harm over the potential for reward when entering new or unfamiliar situations; less likely
to find uncertainty or ambiguity enjoyable, stimulating, or potentially profitable. For example, the person will avoid taking
unplanned risks (ie. risk that has not had time for preparation); dislike scrutiny and the ‘limelight’ because it might invite
criticism - despite desiring appreciation or recognition for achievements.


ii. He/she tends to avoid new, uncertain, or novel situations that they have not been able to prepare for - especially if they can
do so without calling attention to themselves. He/she tends to prefer situations where rules or prescribed roles are
preordained (e.g. will prefer a business meeting to a picnic). He/she will tend to chastise self whenever they perceive
themselves as making a mistake, not living up to their values, or not behaving properly.

Place a check in the relevant box and record the score in the box below
Q Littie or no match (description does not apply) score = 0
Q Some match (some features apply) score = 1
QO Moderate match (has significant features) score = 2
Q Good match (has the majority of features) score = 3
Q Very good match (exemplifies features) score = 4
Score for this feature = C__]


b. Tend to discount critical feedback or new information.

i. When confronted with feedback that they disagree will tend to automatically refute (albeit often this is done silently),
minimize or avoid the feedback, and/or pretend to agree as a means of preventing further criticism. For example, may
respond to feedback by ruminating about a rebuttal, searching from disconfirming evidence, shutting down, refusing to
listen, counter-attacking, changing the topic, and/or behaving as if bored.

ii. May secretly harbour resentment and/or plans for revenge if challenged, questioned or frustrated, or feel thwarted,
overwhelmed or hopeless about achieving a desired goal.

iii. To avoid critical feedback may be reluctant to reveal their ‘true beliefs or feelings’.
iv. May automatically go on the offensive or defensive when feeling criticized - for example, by answering a question with a
question, by counter-attacking, by behaving ‘as if’ they had not heard the feedback, by denial or by providing a vague answer.

v. May attempt to beat their imagined critic to the punch by criticizing or minimizing their own accomplishments first.


Place a check in the relevant box and record the score in the box below
Q Little or no match (description does not apply) score = 0
Q Some match (some features apply) score = 1
QO Moderate match (has significant features) score = 2
Q Good match (has the majority of features) score = 3
Q Very good match (exemplifies features) score = 4
Score for this feature = C__]
2. Deficits in emotional expression and awareness.
a. Diminished emotional experience and awareness.
i, Low awareness of emotions and bodily sensations. For example, he/she may report difficulty labelling and distinguishing
between emotions and bodily sensations. He/she may report feeling tired or fatigued when depressed or anxious - rather


than using emotional words to describe mood. He/she may adamantly insist that they do not experience certain emotions
(e.g. anger). He/she may feel numb or empty when experiencing intense emotions (especially anger). He/she tends to report
thoughts when asked about emotions or feelings - rather than using emotion words. He/she may use idiosyncratic and/or
peculiar language when describing emotions (e.g. ‘I feel like plastic’).

ii. Stoical and uncomplaining - minimizes or discounts their emotional experience (e.g. anger, pain, excitement) both publicly
and privately (e.g. even when with family). Self-reported mood states are stable, static and with little variability in or contrast
in intensity. He/she may hold idiosyncratic beliefs about certain emotions (e.g. may report they never experience anger
because to them anger means being out-of-control and fits of rage; or they may believe that showing fear or feeling sad is
a sign of weakness or cowardly). He/she tends to under-report emotions. For example, may habitually say ‘I'm fine’ when
queried about how they feel - regardless of their current mood state (e.g. even when highly distressed). He/she exhibits high
distress tolerance - able to tolerate pain or discomfort without complaint for long periods - may ignore injuries or medical
problems.


Place a check in the relevant box and record the score in the box below
Q Little or no match (description does not apply) score = 0
Q Some match (some features apply) score = 1
QO Moderate match (has significant features) score = 2
Q Good match (has the majority of features) score = 3
Q Very good match (exemplifies features) score = 4
Score for this feature = C__]
b. Mask inner feelings (via facial expressions, gestures, actions).
i. Strive to ‘keep up appearances’ and to be seen as ‘in control’.
ii. Facial expressions or body posture may not match inner experience or may be incongruent - for example, may smile when
afraid/angry, may cry when angry, may sit upright in rigid position with tightly clasped hands while smiling.


iii, May exhibit little variability in the expression or intensity of positive or negative emotional experiences. May tend to inhibit
the expression of both negative and positive emotion. May rarely show extreme excitement or demonstrations of joy.
iv. Rarely describe self as excitable or enthusiastic - tend to be serious, rarely engage in spontaneous laughter or giggling -
although may rehearse jokes and may be able to entertain or make others laugh. May pride self in being witty.
v. Expressions tend to be either flat, impassive or restrained (e.g. flat-faced when angry or amused), and disingenuous and/or
incongruent with inner experience (e.g. smiling when distressed, showing expression of concern when angry).
vi. Rarely demonstrative in gestures, facial expressions, or actions (e.g. less likely to make large or big gestures, less likely to use
hand or arm gestures while talking).
vii. May consider masking emotions a sign of maturity.
Prototype rating for this OC feature
Place a check In the relevant box and record the score in the box below
QO Littie or no match (description does not apply) score = 0
Q Some match (some features apply) score = 1
Q Moderate match (has significant features) score = 2
Q Good match (has the majority of features) score = 3
Q Very good match (exemplifies features) score = 4
Score for this feature = C_]


Appendix 28D Clinician Rated OC Trait Rating Form
The full measure includes complete descriptions of each trait and scoring guidelines (Lynch, in press).
Instructions: Read the descriptions of traits below and then rate each trait on the 1-7 scale. Scores of 6 or 7 denote ‘caseness’ - that is, the
individual matches closely the predicted OC trait pattern.
Important: When totalling scores make sure you reverse scores for **Openness to Experience and “Trait Positive Emotionality.
A score of 40 or higher suggests OC ‘caseness’.
Clinicians are encouraged to use individual trait ratings to guide treatment planning (e.g. high scores on emotion expression
inhibition highlight the importance of targeting this feature in treatment).
Descriptions of traits for assessors/clinicians
**Openness to Experience: refers to the degree a person is receptive and open to new ideas and change, novel situations, or unexpected
information - including the degree a person is willing to listen to critical feedback before making a judgement and are willing to admit
when they are wrong.


Clinician Rated OC Trait Rating Form

OC Trait Low High

“*Openness to Experience 1234567 ----nennnnnnnncnrc cence cnn nnntttte ncn cen cn cnn nennntnsaec econ ates
Affiliation Needs 1234567 ---------- 22222 ee nn nee eee ene nnn ene een ence
Trait Negative Emotionality 1234567 ---------- 22222 oe enn nee een eee ee nen eee enna
“Trait Positive Emotionality 1234567 ---------- 22222 oe enn nee een eee ee nen eee enna
Emotion expression inhibition 1234567 ---------- 22222 oe enn nee een eee ee nen eee enna
High moral certitude 1234567 ---------- 22222 oe enn nee een eee ee nen eee enna
Compulsive striving 1234567 ---------- 22222 oe enn nee een eee ee nen eee enna
High detail-focused processing 1234567 ~---------------------nnnn nnn c cence ence en eccenn cc nnec ence cence nes
Note: When totalling scores it is important to reverse score Openness to Experience and Trait Positive Emotionality - see ** next to item.


Chapter 29 Schema therapy
Tara Cutland Green and Gillian Heath"
Alan Carr and Muireann McNulty

DOI: 10.4324/9781315739243-29
Overview
Schema therapy (ST) is an integrative therapy with a unifying theory of problem aetiology and change that combines cognitive-behavioural,
attachment, gestalt, constructivist, psychodynamic and object relations perspectives and techniques (Arntz & Jacob, 2012; Farrell et al.,
2014; van Vreeswijk et al., 2012; Young et al., 2003). In this chapter we outline the theoretical concepts of and research findings on ST. We
then describe how to apply ST methods.

Jeffrey Young developed ST to treat clients with chronic, entrenched, personality-level difficulties who did not respond to traditional
cognitive-behavioural therapy (Young et al., 2003). He found that these clients benefitted from an approach with a greater emphasis on
the therapeutic relationship, affect and mood states, childhood origins of presenting problems, lifelong coping styles and core entrenched
themes, or early maladaptive schemas (now referred to as schemas).

Schemas are dysfunctional emotional and cognitive constructs regarding the self and relationships with others that begin in childhood
or adolescence as a result of core emotional needs not being met, and which lead to the repetition of dysfunctional patterns of thought,
bodily sensations, behaviour, and affect throughout life (Young et al., 2003, p. 7). In addition to the frustration of core needs in childhood,
schema formation is also influenced by the child’s innate temperament and cultural factors such as socio-economic status, ethnicity and


religion. Schemas give rise to cognitive distortions, distressing emotions, and the use of maladaptive coping styles to address the distressing
emotions associated with schema activation. Dysfunctional coping may present as self-defeating behaviour patterns. Over the course of
early development schemas may become fixed through being reinforced or modelled by parents. Later in life they are maintained by the
habitual use of dysfunctional coping styles. In using these coping styles, individuals inadvertently create situations that replicate their
earlier negative experiences with their parents in which they were mistreated, ignored, neglected, put down or controlled and in which
they failed to have their core needs met. Eighteen maladaptive schemas in five domains have been identified in ST. These are listed in Table
29.1 and described in Table 29.2. Schemas form the building blocks of ST formulation. In clients with chronic mental health problems and
personality disorders, maladaptive schemas are triggered or activated by events relevant to the schema and perpetuated via dysfunctional
styles of coping.

Schema modes provide a higher-level construct for ST formulations. A mode refers to the state that an individual is in at any given moment.
Modes can also be understood as ‘parts’ or ‘sides’ of an individual. Schemas and coping styles cluster within modes. At any specific time, some
of our schemas and coping styles are dormant while others are activated. The predominant state that we are in at any specific time point is
called our schema mode. A schema mode is activated when certain events trigger particular schemas, related strong emotions, and coping
responses. These dominate an individual's being, and to some degree cut them off from more adaptive and flexible ways of functioning. A
schema mode may, therefore, be viewed as a facet of the self involving specific schemas and coping styles, that has not been fully integrated
with other facets of the self.

Table 29.1 Maladaptive schema domains and schemas

Schema domain Schemas


Disconnection and rejection 1. Abandonment/Instability 2. Mistrust/Abuse 3. Emotional Deprivation 4. Defectiveness/Shame
5. Social Isolation/Alienation
Impaired autonomy and 6. Dependence/Incompetence 7. Vulnerability to Harm or Illness 8. Enmeshment/Undeveloped
performance Self 9. Failure
Impaired limits 10. Entitlement/Grandiosity 1 1. Insufficient Self-Control/Self-Discipline
Other-directedness 12. Subjugation 13. Self-Sacrifice14. Approval-Seeking/Recognition-Seeking
Overvigilance and inhibition 15. Negativity/Pessimism 16. Emotional Inhibition 17. Unrelenting Standards/
Hypercriticalness 18. Punitiveness
Effectiveness of schema therapy
ST aims to help clients change dysfunctional patterns of coping and heal their schemas (Arntz & Jacob, 2012; Farrell et al, 2014; van
Vreeswijk et al., 2012; Young et al.. 2003). At the heart of the model is the concept of limited reparenting, in which the therapist aims
partially to meet the client’s core unmet needs from childhood, within appropriate boundaries. The therapeutic alliance plays a central
role in ST (Spinhoven et al., 2007). It provides a forum for the client to learn about how their schemas are triggered by other people and
to develop more adaptive ways of relating to themselves and others. The therapist draws upon cognitive, experiential, interpersonal and
behavioural strategies, blending them in a flexible manner according to clients’ needs. While the effectiveness of ST has been evaluated in the
treatment of personality disorders and other DSM disorders, core ST concepts and interventions are not diagnostically driven but oriented to
individualised case formulation. ST is a transdiagnostic intervention that integrates concepts and approaches from various evidence-based
therapies.


Ina systematic review of 12 studies that included randomised controlled trials (RCT), non-randomised controlled trials and uncontrolled
trials for a range of disorders, Masley et al. (2012) concluded that there was evidence for the effectiveness of ST in the treatment of
personality disorders, especially borderline personality disorder, and some preliminary evidence that ST may have an important role to play
in the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), agoraphobia, eating disorders and substance misuse. Other reviews have reached
similar conclusions about the value of ST in the treatment of personality disorders (Jacob & Arntz, 2013; Sempértegui et al., 2013).

Table 29.2 Descriptions of 18 early maladaptive schemas and 5 schema domains

Domain of Disconnection and Rejection

Expectation that one’s needs for security, safety, stability, nurturance, empathy, sharing of feelings, acceptance and respect will not

be met in a predictable manner. Typical family origin is detached, cold, rejecting, withholding, lonely, explosive, unpredictable or

abusive.

1 Abandonment/Instability AB The perceived instability or unreliability of those available for support and

connection. Involves the sense that significant others will not be able to
continue providing emotional support, connection, strength or practical
protection because they are emotionally unstable and unpredictable (e.g.
have angry outbursts), unreliable or erratically present; because they
will die imminently; or because they will abandon the client in favour of
someone better.

2  MISTRUST/ABUSE MA_ The expectation that others will hurt, abuse, humiliate, cheat, lie,

manipulate or take advantage. Usually involves the perception that the
ceesentuentnsntisntittinttintinntinntintinntintitnnene am is intentional or the result of unjustified and extreme negligence: May


include the sense that one always ends up being cheated relative to others
or ‘getting the short end of the stick’.

3. Emotional Deprivation ED Expectation that one’s desire for a normal degree of emotional support
will not be adequately met by others. The three major forms of deprivation
are:A. Deprivation of nurturance: Absence of attention, affection, warmth,
or companionship.B. Deprivation of empathy: Absence of understanding,
listening, self-disclosure, or mutual sharing of feelings from others.C.
Deprivation of protection: Absence of strength, direction, or guidance from
others.

4 Defectiveness/ Shame DS The feeling that one is defective, bad, unwanted, inferior or invalid in
important respects; or that one would be unlovable to significant others
if exposed. May involve hypersensitivity to criticism, rejection and blame;
self-consciousness, comparisons and insecurity around others; or a sense
of shame regarding one's perceived flaws. These flaws may be private (e.g.
selfishness, angry impulses, unacceptable sexual desires) or public (e.g.
undesirable physical appearance, social awkwardness).

5S Social Isolation/Alienation SI The feeling that one is isolated from the rest of the world, different from
other people, and/or not part of any group or community.

Domain of Impaired Autonomy and Performance

Expectations about oneself and the environment that interfere with one’s perceived ability to separate, survive, function

independently or perform successfully. Typical family origin is enmeshed, undermining of the child's confidence, overprotective or

failing to reinforce the child for performing competently outside the family.

6 Dependence/Incompetence DI Belief that one is unable to handle one’s everyday responsibilities in a


competent manner, without considerable help from others (e.g. take care
of oneself, solve daily problems, exercise good judgement, tackle new tasks,
make good decisions). Often presents as helplessness.

7 Vulnerability to Harm or Illness VH_ = Exaggerated fear that imminent catastrophe will strike at any time and
that one will be unable to prevent it. Fears focus on one or more of the
following:A. Medical catastrophes: e.g. heart attacks, AIDS.B. Emotional
catastrophes: e.g. going crazy.C. External catastrophes: e.g. elevators
collapsing, victimized by criminals, airplane crashes, earthquakes.

8 Enmeshment/ Undeveloped Self EM_ Excessive emotional involvement and closeness with one or more
significant others (often parents) at the expense of full individuation or
normal social development. Often involves the belief that at least one of the
enmeshed individuals cannot survive or be happy without the constant
support of the other. May also include feelings of being smothered by, or
fused with, others, OR insufficient individual identity. Often experienced as
a feeling of emptiness and floundering, having no direction, or in extreme
cases questioning one’s existence.

9 Failure FA The belief that one has failed, will inevitably fail or is fundamentally
inadequate relative to one’s peers, in areas of achievement (school, career,
sports, etc.). Often involves beliefs that one is stupid, inept, untalented,
ignorant, lower in status, less successful than others, etc.

Domain of Impaired Limits

Deficiency in internal limits, responsibility to others, or long-term goal orientation. Leads to difficulty respecting the rights of

others, cooperating with others, making commitments or setting and meeting realistic personal goals. Typical family of origin is.


characterized by permissiveness, overindulgence, lack of direction or a sense of superiority - rather than appropriate confrontation,

discipline, and limits in relation to taking responsibility, cooperating in a reciprocal manner and setting goals. In some cases, the

child may not have been pushed to tolerate normal levels of discomfort, or may not have been given adequate supervision, direction

or guidance.

10 Entitlement/Grandiosity ET The belief that one is superior to other people, entitled to special rights
and privileges, or not bound by the rules of reciprocity that guide normal
social interaction. Often involves insistence that one should be able todo
or have whatever one wants, regardless of what is realistic, what others
consider reasonable, or the cost to others; OR an exaggerated focus on
superiority (e.g. being among the most successful, famous, wealthy) in
order to achieve power or control (not primarily for attention or approval).
Sometimes includes excessive competitiveness towards, or domination
of, others: asserting one’s power, forcing one's point of view, or controlling
the behaviour of others in line with one’s own desires, without empathy or
concern for others’ needs or feelings

11 Insufficient Self-Control/Self-Discipline IS Pervasive difficulty or refusal to exercise sufficient self-control and
frustration tolerance to achieve one’s personal goals, or to restrain the
excessive expression of one’s emotions and impulses. In its milder form,
clients present with an exaggerated emphasis on discomfort-avoidance:
avoiding pain, conflict, confrontation, responsibility or overexertion at the
expense of personal fulfilment, commitment or integrity.

Domain of Other-Directedness

..Anexcessive focus on the desires, feelings and responses of others, at the expense of one’s own needs in order to gain love and


approval, maintain one’s sense of connection or avoid retaliation. Usually involves suppression and lack of awareness regarding

one’s own anger and natural inclinations. Typical family origin is based on conditional acceptance: children must suppress

important aspects of themselves in order to gain love, attention and approval. In many such families, the parents’ emotional needs
and desires - or social acceptance and status - are valued more than the unique needs and feelings of each child.

12 Subjugation SB Excessive surrendering of control to others because one feels coerced. This
is done usually to avoid anger, retaliation or abandonment. The two major
forms of subjugation are:A. Subjugation of needs: Suppression of one's
preferences, decisions and desires.B. Subjugation of emotions: Suppression
of emotional expression, especially anger.Usually involves the perception
that one’s own desires, opinions, and feelings are not valid or important
to others. Frequently presents as excessive compliance, combined with
hypersensitivity to feeling trapped. Generally leads to a build-up of anger,
manifested in maladaptive symptoms (e.g. passive-aggressive behaviour,
uncontrolled outbursts of temper, psychosomatic symptoms, withdrawal
of affection, ‘acting out’, or substance misuse).

13 Self-Sacrifice SS Excessive focus on voluntarily meeting the needs of others in daily
situations, at the expense of one’s own gratification. The most common
reasons are to prevent causing pain to others, to avoid guilt from feeling
selfish or to maintain the connection with others perceived as needy.
Often results from an acute sensitivity to the pain of others. Sometimes
leads to a sense that one’s own needs are not being adequately met and to
resentment of those who are taken care of. (Overlaps with the concept of co-
dependency.)

14 Approval- Seeking/ Recognition-Seeking AS Excessive emphasis on gaining approval, recognition or attention from


other people, or fitting in, at the expense of developing a secure and true
sense of self. One's sense of esteem is dependent primarily on the reactions
of others rather than on one’s own natural inclinations. Sometimes
includes an overemphasis on status, appearance, social acceptance, money
or achievement as a means of gaining approval, admiration or attention
(not primarily for power or control). Frequently results in major life
decisions that are inauthentic or unsatisfying, or in hypersensitivity to
rejection.

Domain of Overvigilance and Inhibition

Excessive emphasis on suppressing one’s spontaneous feelings, impulses and choices OR on meeting rigid, internalized rules

and expectations about performance and ethical behaviour, often at the expense of happiness, self-expression, relaxation, close

relationships or health. Typical family of origin was grim, demanding and sometimes punitive: performance, duty, perfectionism,

following rules, hiding emotions and avoiding mistakes predominated over pleasure, joy and relaxation. There is usually an

undercurrent of pessimism and worry, that things could fall apart if one fails to be vigilant and careful at all times.

15 Negativity/ Pessimism NP Apervasive, lifelong focus on the negative aspects of life (pain, death,
loss, disappointment, conflict, guilt, resentment, unsolved problems,
potential mistakes, betrayal, things that could go wrong, etc.) while
minimizing or neglecting the positive or optimistic aspects. Usually
includes an exaggerated expectation - in a wide range of work, financial or
interpersonal situations - that things will eventually go seriously wrong, or
that aspects of one's life that seem to be going well will ultimately fall apart.
Usually involves an inordinate fear of making mistakes that might lead

ceveteetetintnntetintisttnetinetnetietintietintienneeent) ANANncal collapse, loss, humiliation or being trapped in a bad situation.


Because potential negative outcomes are exaggerated, these clients are
frequently characterized by chronic worry, vigilance, complaining or
indecision.

16 Emotional Inhibition EI The excessive inhibition of spontaneous action, feeling or communication,
usually to avoid disapproval by others, feelings of shame or losing control
of one’s impulses. The most common areas of inhibition involve:A.
Inhibition of anger and aggression.B. Inhibition of positive impulses (e.g.
joy, affection, sexual excitement, play).C. Difficulty expressing vulnerability
or communicating freely about one's feelings, needs, etc.D. Excessive
emphasis on rationality while disregarding emotions.

17 Unrelenting Standards/ US = The underlying belief that one must strive to meet very high internalized

Hypercriticalness standards of behaviour and performance, usually to avoid criticism.
Typically results in feelings of pressure or difficulty slowing down,
and in hypercriticalness towards oneself and others. Must involve
significant impairment in pleasure, relaxation, health, self-esteem, sense
of accomplishment or satisfying relationships. Unrelenting standards
typically present as:A. Perfectionism, inordinate attention to detail,
or an underestimate of how good one’s own performance is relative to
the norm.B. Rigid rules and ‘shoulds’ in many areas of life, including
unrealistically high moral, ethical, cultural or religious precepts.C.
Preoccupation with time and efficiency, so that more can be accomplished.

18 Punitiveness PU The belief that people should be harshly punished for making mistakes.
Involves the tendency to be angry, intolerant, punitive and impatient

sessessetssesnsensetinstnsetnsetnsttisitisitisttisttisttisstisstsseeneeeeith those people (including oneself) who do not meet one’s expectations


or standards. Usually includes difficulty forgiving mistakes in oneself or
others, because of a reluctance to consider extenuating circumstances,
allow for human imperfection or empathize with feelings.
Note: Adapted with kind permission from Jeffrey Young, PhD. Copyright 2003. Schema Therapy Institute, $61 10th Ave., Ste. 43D, New York, NY 10036.
Two large RCTs have provided evidence for the effectiveness of ST in the treatment of a range of personality disorders. Giesen-Bloo et al.
(2006) compared the effectiveness of ST and transference focused therapy (TFT), a structured, evidence-based psychodynamic treatment
for personality disorders, with 88 participants with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder (BPD). Both groups received two therapy
sessions per week over 3 years. Compared with those receiving TFT, clients who received ST showed greater reductions in BPD symptoms
and psychological dysfunction and an improvement in overall quality of life. Fewer patients dropped out of ST than TFT, and both patients’
and therapists’ ratings of the quality of the patient-therapist relationship were higher in ST than in TFT. Smaller, non-randomised and
uncontrolled studies also provide support for the effectiveness of ST in reducing BPD symptoms and improving general well-being (Farrell et
Bamelis et al. (2014) conducted an RCT with 323 participants, comparing outcomes from SO sessions of ST with treatment as usual (TAU)
and clarification-oriented psychotherapy (COP), which is a form of client-centred therapy developed for personality disorders. Participants
had a principal diagnosis of at least one of the following personality disorders: avoidant, dependent, obsessive-compulsive, histrionic,
narcissistic or paranoid. A significantly greater proportion of participants recovered with ST compared to COP and TAU, and findings did
not differ according to specific personality disorder diagnosis. Fewer participants dropped out of ST and COP compared to TAU. ST patients
evidenced significantly less depressive disorder than TAU participants and higher social functioning compared to TAU and COP participants.
There are numerous case studies, uncontrolled studies, non-randomised trials, and small RCTs providing support for the effectiveness of
ST. These include studies of individual and group ST with BPD in outpatient and inpatient settings (Dickhaut & Amtz, 2014; Reiss et al,


2014); studies of ST with other disorders including cluster B and C personality disorders (Gude et al., 2001; Renner et al., 2013); antisocial,
borderline, narcissistic, or paranoid personality disorders with high levels of psychopathy (Bernstein et al., 2012; Chakhssi et al., 2014);
panic disorder and agoraphobia (Gude & Hoffart, 2008); PTSD (Cockram et al., 2010); depression (Carter et al., 2013; Malogiannis et al.,
2014; Seavey & Moore, 2012); eating disorders (Ohanian, 2002; Simpson et al., 2010; Simpson & Slowey, 2011); and substance misuse (Ball,
2007; Ball et al., 2011; Ball & Young, 2000). At the time of writing, other large-scale trials evaluating the effectiveness of ST for personality
disorders are currently in progress (e.g. Bernstein et al., 2012; Wetzelaer et al., 2014).

Case vignette: Elaine

Elaine, a 35-year-old, white British woman was referred to a psychological therapies service by her GP for the assessment and treatment of
self-harm, anxiety, anger problems and low self-esteem. A clinical psychologist, trained in ST, assessed her. In their first meeting, Elaine said
that she hated herself and wanted to ‘cut out' a part of herself that was bad, that her boss was ‘out to get her’ and that her boyfriend, Dan,
couldn’t care less. Her line manager in her warehouse job had recently threatened to sack her for swearing at him on several occasions when
he had asked her to redo a task. She was having daily arguments with Dan, in which she accused him of not caring and of fancying other
women.

Elaine felt ugly, disgusting and fat, and attempted to eat as little as possible but ended up grazing on junk food. She would often put other
people's needs ahead of her own (e.g. agreeing to see her mother when she didn't want to) for fear of rejection. Elaine felt it was inevitable
that things would go wrong for her because she was like a ‘bad apple core’ and most people were out for themselves in any case, so wouldn’t
treat her well. She felt she didn’t deserve to live and wanted to kill herself, but felt she couldn't because of her children. She coped day to day
by absorbing herself in chores, banging her head against a wall, burning herself with cigarettes or making superficial cuts to her arms to help
‘release her frustration’. In diagnostic terms, Elaine met criteria for borderline personality disorder.


Elaine grew up with her mother, Nancy, and older sister, Liz. Her father left the family when Elaine was 3 to be with another woman.
Elaine had no subsequent contact with him, as her mother said he was a rapist and not to be trusted. Nancy drank heavily and had a series
of different boyfriends whom Elaine remembers ‘coming and going as they pleased’. Elaine was sexually abused by one of them between the
ages of 5 and 8. She had few memories of her mother paying her attention, playing with her or giving her affection, and recalled being left
crying in a shop when she was 4 years old.

Elaine felt cast as the ‘problem child’ for crying too much and believed her mum preferred Liz. She remembered Liz as always being ‘full
of herself, pushing me about or putting me down’. Elaine had a particularly vivid memory of Liz laughing at her handwriting and calling
her a ‘retard’. Elaine struggled academically at school, got bullied and left aged 14. She coped as a child by either pleasing adults (whom she
felt would hurt her if she stood up to them) or hiding in her room. Her mother disbelieved her when she disclosed the sexual abuse she had
suffered. The distress of this resulted in her taking an overdose.

She left home at 15 years to be with her first boyfriend, Martin, who was violent and humiliated her. Elaine said she was attracted
by the fact that other people were scared of him: ‘He was so tough no-one would with mess with me.’ She had her two daughters from
this relationship. Both regularly witnessed their father beating Elaine. On one occasion, he hit their younger daughter, Charlene, and this
catalysed Elaine's decision to leave Martin.

In her late twenties she met her current boyfriend, Dan, who is calmer but emotionally detached and often plays games on his mobile
phone when with Elaine. She has always felt intensely jealous in this relationship and believes it is only a matter of time before he leaves
her. Dan feels insulted by her jealous outbursts and accusations. He is frustrated that Elaine rarely wants to have sex, feeling she withholds
this deliberately to get back at him. He regularly declares that their relationship is over, leaving their flat for days without saying where he
has gone. Elaine's self-harm intensifies in response to this, which draws Dan back as he feels he has to rescue her or ‘who knows what will
happen’. At other times, she feels desperate to please him and will ask repeatedly if he is OK and whether she has done anything wrong.

We will return to this case study throughout the chapter to illustrate a range of points in the practice of ST.


Core childhood needs and schema acquisition

ST is based on the assumption that there are a number of universal childhood needs that must be fulfilled for healthy psychological
development, which involves acquiring the skills to have one's needs met in an adaptive manner (Rafaeli et al., 2010). Attachment theory
and the work of the British object relations school have been influential in the development of ST theory with respect to the role of unmet
childhood needs in the aetiology of adult psychopathology (Rafaeli et al., 2010). Based on clinical observation and existing theory, Young et
al. (2003) proposed five core needs:

1, Secure attachments to others (including safety, stability, nurturance and acceptance);

2. Autonomy, competence and sense of identity;

3. Freedom to express valid needs and emotions;

4, Spontaneity and play;

5. Realistic limits and self-control.

During their development children create broad organising principles in order to make sense of and adapt to the world. These organising
principles or cognitive-affective patterns are referred to within Piagetian cognitive developmental psychology as schemas (Piaget & Inhelder,
1969). Schemas help children to understand, predict and control their immediate environment. According to ST, when one or more of the
five core needs listed here are not adequately met, a child’s view of themselves and their expectations of others and their future is likely
to become skewed on cognitive and emotional levels, giving rise to maladaptive schemas. In Elaine's case, her mother typically ignored or
criticised her as a child (frustrating her need for nurturance and acceptance), leaving her with a sense that she was unworthy of attention,


unlovable and defective; that others were critical and depriving; and that her future would be lonely. These experiences contributed to the
development of her Emotional Deprivation and Defectiveness schemas.

Young et al. (2003) proposed four types of early life experience that give rise to schemas.

+ Toxic frustration of needs. This occurs when there is a deficit in the early environment, and parents fail to meet children’s needs through
critical, harsh, negligent or extremely unpredictable or inconsistent parenting (as described in Elaine's case).
+ Traumatisation or victimisation. This occurs when a child is mistreated, physically or sexually abused, or bullied, It may lead to Mistrust/

Abuse, Defectiveness/Shame or Vulnerability to Harm schemas.

+ Excessive onus on meeting one need at the expense of another. This occurs when parents focus on minimising children’s emotional
distress to provide a sense of safety, at the expense of meeting their need for autonomy and competence.

+ Selective internalisation of or identification with significant others. This occurs when the child internalises or identifies with toxic
aspects of their parents’ thoughts, feelings, behaviour or experience.

Schemas are thought to develop through an interaction between such adverse early life experiences, temperament and culture. For
example, a temperamentally sensitive child is likely to need highly attuned attention from their parents, whereas a child who is naturally
more aggressive may need greater limit-setting. Elaine described being a clingy child and wanting ‘hugs and nice words’, in contrast to her
sister who seemed more self-contained and determined. Elaine thus seems to have a greater need for affection and approval, and so her
mother’s emotional unavailability and criticism is likely to have affected her particularly deeply.

Elaine had unmet needs in all core domains. Her main schemas were Emotional Deprivation, Defectiveness/Shame, Abandonment,
Mistrust/Abuse, Social Isolation, Vulnerability to Harm, Failure, Subjugation, Insufficient Self-Control, Punitiveness and Negativity/
Pessimism.


The influence of culture on schema acquisition is not, as yet, properly understood or documented. However, dominant cultural values
and social norms may give rise to some schemas more than others. For example, cultures that value status and achievement over personal
relationships may cultivate Unrelenting Standards schemas; those that discourage the expression of personal emotional are likely to
cultivate Emotional Inhibition schemas.

Schemas tend to be self-maintaining through self-confirming cognitive biases and drive dysfunctional coping behaviours that lead
to schema-confirming experiences, usually by eliciting schema-confirming reactions from others. For example, Elaine's Mistrust/Abuse
schema made her hypervigilant for any sign that other people might betray her. On one occasion she interpreted a specific criticism of her
work as a sign that her boss was against her. This made her angry and she responded by swearing at him, leading to him to give her a written
warning, which confirmed and strengthened her mistrust.

Coping styles
People attempt to deal with unmet needs, and schemas based on the experience of unmet needs, in different ways. In ST it is assumed
that the development of one pattern of coping over another is influenced by a number of factors, including biological temperament,
modelling from key caregivers and coping strategies that were reinforced in the original childhood contexts of unmet needs. The many ways
that individuals cope with the distressing emotions associated with unmet needs and early maladaptive schemas are derived from three
automatic responses to threat: fight, flight and freeze. Three maladaptive and schema-perpetuating styles of coping are distinguished in ST:

+ Surrender (which is derived from the automatic ‘freeze’ response);

+ Overcompensation (which is derived from the automatic ‘fight’ response);

+ Avoidance (which is derived from the automatic ‘flight’ response).


Surrender
This coping style maintains a predictable and consistent, schema-distorted, view of the self and the world by preventing the threat and
discomfort of the unfamiliar through repeating schema-perpetuating experiences. For example, if Elaine were to surrender to her Social
Isolation schema (see Table 29.2 for a description of this schema) at a social gathering, she would attend to and exaggerate the ways she was
different from other guests, while not noticing all of the ways that other guests were similar to each other and to her.
Overcompensation
This coping style is seen in attempts to elicit the opposite feeling to the core schema emotion, or prevent the schema being or appearing
true. If Elaine were overcompensating for her Social Isolation schema, she might become a social chameleon, mirroring the behaviours and
attitudes of those around her to feel more like she fitted in.
Avoidance
This coping style is seen in attempts to avoid or escape from unwanted feelings associated with the schema or unmet need, through avoiding
certain situations, thoughts and feelings. When Elaine used avoidant coping with her Social Isolation schema she avoided any social
gathering.

Each of these styles of coping prevents schema healing. In the various examples of coping with a Social Isolation schema described earlier,
Elaine would be denied the experience of being in a group or community, acting authentically and feeling enough similarity to other people
to feel genuinely part of the group. Young et al. (2003, p. 38) usefully outline other examples of these three styles of coping.


Schema modes
A schema mode refers to ‘the set of schemas or schema operations - adaptive or maladaptive - that are currently active for an
individual’ (Young et al., 2003, p. 271). The concept was developed by Young when treating clients with particularly severe difficulties, who
displayed too many schemas to make this a useful unit of formulation. However, as formulating and working within a mode framework has
proved useful with a range of presentations, it is now integral to ST. While schemas are enduring trait-like characteristics, modes are state-
like attributes. In ST modes are classified into four types:

+ Child modes

+ Maladaptive coping modes

+ Toxic parent modes

+ Healthy adult modes.
Child modes
When in a child mode, the individual experiences and expresses basic, universal core needs and emotions in ways that feel childlike.
Schemas commonly felt in child modes include: Emotional Deprivation, Abandonment, Defectiveness/Shame, Mistrust/Abuse, Subjugation,
Social Isolation, Failure, Dependence, Enmeshment and Vulnerability to Harm. Examples of child modes include the Vulnerable and Angry
Child modes.
Vulnerable Child
A person in this mode feels vulnerable and filled with painful feelings such as anxiety, grief, shame or loneliness, and manifests such


feelings nonverbally, sometimes subtly, for example through tears, downcast eyes, apparent tension, and a wobbly voice. In clinical practice,
therapists and clients may personify and name this mode ‘Little [client’s name], or refer to it as the client's ‘Little Side’. For example, in
the case of Elaine, the therapist and client referred to ‘Little Elaine’ as the personification of her Vulnerable Child mode, in which she felt
ashamed, scared, lonely, powerless, useless, unloved and isolated.

Angry Child

A person in this mode feels intense anger and rage in response to extreme frustration and sense of powerless associated with felt
mistreatment and/or not having other core needs met. Elaine's Angry Child mode was associated with an intense sense of anger and
frustration in response to perceived unfairness and deprivation. Examples of how she expressed this include the following: ‘Why can’t Dan
be there for me for once, I'm going to text him and show him how bad I feel’; ‘I hate my boss, he’s horrible to me, I'm going to give him what
for’

Maladaptive coping modes

Maladaptive coping modes are the ‘ways of being’ and behaving that exhibit the dysfunctional coping styles outlined earlier. They fall into
the three categories of surrendering, overcompensatory and avoidant types of coping modes. Some common examples of coping modes are
described here in turn.

Compliant Surrenderer (a surrendering mode)

This is a ‘people-pleasing’ mode. In this mode clients give in to the perceived demands or expectations of others in an attempt to prevent
emotional or physical pain associated with rejection, abandonment, being hurt, or to get needs met (e.g. needs for safety, connection
or acceptance). Therapists may feel good, even elated, at the level of receptivity and responsiveness to their input that clients express


in this mode, only to find a frustrating lack of follow-through. Or they may feel irritated, detecting their client's lack of authenticity.
Schemas commonly associated with this mode include Approval-Seeking, Self-Sacrifice, Subjugation, Enmeshment, Emotional Deprivation,
Abandonment, Defectiveness/Shame and Mistrust/Abuse.

Elaine named her Compliant Surrender mode her ‘Appeasing Side’, reflecting her attempt to avoid rejection by doing what other people
wanted, regardless of her own needs and preferences. The mode developed in mid-childhood as she learned that by pleasing her mother she
could gain some attention and temporary approval. In her current life, it was triggered when she feared losing the affection of people she
cared about, particularly her boyfriend, Dan, and her older daughter, Lucy.

Bully and Attack (an overcompensatory mode)

In this mode clients use threats, intimidation and aggression to achieve their ends. It may include retaliating or asserting a dominant
position over other people to compensate for feelings of shame, loneliness or vulnerability. Faced with this mode therapists often feel
threatened or anxious and may be drawn into fight, flight or freeze reactions. Asserting dominance through professionalism is an example
of a therapist's ‘fight’ reaction. Diverting the therapy session onto a safer topic or technique would be a ‘flight’ reaction. Therapists who
experience a ‘freeze’ reaction may find their minds going blank and fumble their responses to clients. Schemas often associated with this
mode include: Mistrust/Abuse, Emotional Deprivation, Defectiveness/Shame and Punitiveness.

Detached Protector (avoidant mode)

This mode is associated with an avoidant coping style. In the Detached Protector mode clients use emotional detachment to try to protect
themselves from feelings held in their Vulnerable and Angry Child modes. When in this mode clients may report feeling numb or flat, appear
emotionally distant and avoid closeness in relationships. Depending on their own schemas, therapists may respond by feeling anxious at the
lack of felt connection; at a loss as to what to do; bored; or drawn into practical or intellectual conversations. These therapist responses can


offer clues to the presence of detachment and be shared with the client to help them understand how this mode creates emotional distance
in their relationships more generally.
Detached Self-Soother (an avoidant mode)
There are variants of the Detached Protector mode. One of these is the Detached Self-Soother mode in which clients use repetitive or
addictive behaviours to distract and distance themselves from painful feelings. Schemas commonly associated with both the Detached
Protector and the Detached Self-Soother modes include Emotional Deprivation, Emotional Inhibition and Self-Punitiveness. Elaine had a
blend of a Detached Protector / Self-Soother mode, which she and her therapist labelled her ‘Escape Side’. This mode was often triggered by
feelings of defectiveness and shame, from which she would try to escape by withdrawing from other people or trying to distract herself by
burning or cutting herself and grazing on junk food. This mode developed in early childhood, as she found she felt safer when she was on her
own in her room and that food provided some comfort from feeling upset.
Angry Protector (an avoidant mode)
A second variant of the detached protector mode is the Angry Protector mode. In this mode clients indirectly express anger, mistrust and
resentment in a controlled manner to keep others at a distance. On the receiving end of this mode therapists may feel confused about what is
happening within the therapy session and a desire to distance themselves from their client. Alternatively, they may find themselves drawn
to placate the client and avoid saying things with which their client might disagree or find challenging. Schemas commonly associated with
this mode include Mistrust/Abuse, Subjugation and Emotional Inhibition.

Elaine and her therapist called her Angry Protector mode her ‘Wary/Mistrusting Side’ that would keep ‘a close eye’ on other people with
the assumption that they would hurt or let her down. This mode would make her particularly suspicious about whether her boyfriend,


Dan, cared about her or was faithful to her. When active in sessions, her therapist felt under pressure to agree with her and found it hard to
present an alternative view, for fear of losing her trust.
Toxic parent modes
These parent modes are states dominated by the experience of internalised representations of the toxic aspects of parenting received in
childhood. Self-talk that occurs in these modes typically mimics the ‘voice’ of the individual's parents. (In this context the voices experienced
have the quality of normal thoughts. They are qualitatively different from auditory hallucinations associated with psychosis which is
discussed in Chapter 25. Auditory hallucinations are experienced as similar to the sensation of hearing others conversing.) The content of
self-talk that occurs in parent modes reflects the toxic messages clients received from their parents, and induces distressing emotions. Parent
modes often give rise to emotions associated with the vulnerable and angry child modes. The principle parent modes are:

+ Punitive or Critical Parent

+ Demanding Parent.
Punitive or Critical Parent
In this mode clients experience an internal, critical or punishing voice (or self-talk) that directs criticism and blame towards the self,
typically inducing feelings of shame or emotional pain associated with being rejected. Schemas often associated with this mode include
Punitiveness, Defectiveness/Shame, Mistrust/Abuse, Subjugation and Emotional Deprivation.

For example, Elaine would experience a voice (or self-talk) saying ‘You're trouble, no-one loves you and you're going to get it all

wrong’ This was the message she internalised from her childhood experience of her mother’s repeated criticism and neglect. This critical,
punitive message and associated memories of bodily sensations from her childhood would induce feelings of fear, shame, deprivation and


defectiveness associated with her Vulnerable Child mode. They would also induce feelings of anger, frustration and mistrust associated with
her Angry Child mode. The intense negative emotions associated with these child modes would trigger one of her coping modes - typically
her Compliant Surrenderer mode (her ‘Appeasing Side’) or her Detached Self-Soother (‘Escape’ mode) - in an attempt to manage these
negative feelings.
Demanding Parent
In this mode clients experience an internal voice (or self-talk) that imposes impossibly high standards and demands towards the self, always
pushing for more in terms of both quantity and quality. Clients ina Demanding Parent mode typically feel under huge pressure to meet these
high standards. When unable to perform toa high enough standard, they feel overwhelmed, inadequate or guilty. Schemas often associated
with this mode include Unrelenting Standards, Failure, Emotional Deprivation and Self-Sacrifice.
The Healthy Adult mode
The Healthy Adult mode is the executive mode. In ST therapists aim to strengthen this mode, so clients can adaptively meet core needs
experienced in child modes, and diminish the degree to which maladaptive parent modes and dysfunctional coping modes affect their lives.
The Healthy Adult mode is typically personified and named ‘Big [client's name] (e.g. ‘Big Elaine’), to signify its strength and evoke the feeling
of a healthy parent figure from the perspective of the Vulnerable Child mode.

In addition to the most common modes described above, some examples of further modes and associated schemas are summarised in
Table 29.3. Bernstein, De Vos and van den Broek’s Mode Observation Scale (2009) contains a comprehensive list of schema modes.

In developing an individualised formulation of the origins, nature and function of your client’s modes, blended modes and unique labels
may be identified and used. For example a, Hopeless/Pessimistic mode would be similar to the Complaining Protector, which doesn't exhibit


complaint and has the function of protecting against feelings of disappointment and loss. A mode formulation can be mapped out visually.
Figure 29.1 shows Elaine's mode map.

Having described the main concepts and assumptions of the ST model, we will now outline how you can put these into practice using
ST methods. Next we will cover the key components of the assessment and change phases of therapy, including reparenting, experiential,
cognitive and behavioural strategies, and using the therapy relationship for change.

Assessment for schema therapy
ST assessment involves orienting your client to ST; developing a shared understanding of problem patterns in terms of unmet needs,
schemas and schema-triggering, coping styles and schema modes; identifying the origins of these, considering early experiences and
temperament; and establishing a therapeutic relationship. In the assessment phase you will also be determining your client's suitability for
ST. Three assessment methods are used in ST: interview, inventories and imagery.
Table 29.3 Further modes in schema therapy and schemas often associated with them
Mode Mode Type Description Schemas often associated with mode
Happy/Playful Child Child Feels content and free; This mode arises in the absence of
openly expresses feelings negative schema activation
and feels connected
to others; enjoys
activities; acts in playful,
spontaneous ways


Impulsive/Undisciplined Child Acts impulsively to get Insufficient Self-Control/Self-Discipline
Child what he or she wants (IS)Entitlement/Grandiosity (ET)
without regard for others
or healthy limits
Self-Aggrandiser Overcompensatory coping Feels superior, deserving Entitlement/Grandiosity
mode of special treatment, (ET)Unrelenting Standards/
looks down on others Hypercriticalness (US)Emotional
and values appearances = Deprivation (ED)Defectiveness/Shame
and status more than (DS)Subjugation (SB)
authentic connection
with their feelings or
others
Perfectionistic Overcontroller Overcompensatory coping Makes anxious or Unrelenting Standards/
mode pressured attempts Hypercriticalness (US)Subjugation
to protect self from (SB)Emotional Inhibition (EI)Mistrust/
perceived threatthrough Abuse (MA)Emotional Deprivation (ED)
rituals, order and/or
perfectionism
Detached Self-Stimulator Avoidant coping mode Does things to create Punitiveness (PU)Emotional Inhibition
intense or exciting (EI)
feelings that mask
painful feelings
Complaining Protector Avoidant coping mode Expresses discontentor Subjugation (SB)Emotional


distress ina mannerthat Deprivation (ED) Mistrust/Abuse (MA)
conveys helplessness Defectiveness/Shame (DS)Dependence/
and dissatisfaction Incompetence (DI)
with others, while not
showing vulnerable
feelings and needs in
such a way that would
allow others to help
CO nnnngantanyenattaeetnnn
\ ove contqne sad cope en Poe ahng = D
ee ae
/ “mE roe,
ae? See
Na (ose a emt tras”
S wiiition
{Prenat \
\, wvea tae seme mem}
ea /


Figure 29.1 Schema mode map for Elaine
Interview
As in a standard psychological assessment interview (such as that described in Chapter 8), use skilful questioning to derive a good
understanding of your client's:
+ Presenting problems
+ The life patterns maintaining these
+ Goals for therapy.
Additionally, obtain background information regarding your client’s:
+Family of origin and life history, including significant life events, relationships with parents, siblings and peers in childhood and
adolescence, education and occupational history, and interests.
+ Current living and work situation, social network, significant friendships and relationships.
+ Faith/spirituality.
+ Culture and ethnicity.
+ Experiences of previous or current interventions, including psychotherapy, inpatient treatment and prescribed psychoactive medication.
+ Ways of coping, including drug and alcohol use.
+ Risk to self and others.


Observe how your client responds to questions, including their non-verbal communications and style of interacting. Do they avoid eye
contact with you and describe their situation in an emotionless manner, suggesting a Defectiveness/Shame schema and an avoidant,
Detached Protector coping mode? Do they enquire after your well-being and seem to want to please you, suggesting a Self-Sacrifice schema
and a Compliant Surrenderer coping mode? Do they ask for details about your credentials and success rates with an air of superiority,
suggesting Emotional Deprivation and Mistrust/Abuse Schemas and an overcompensatory, Self-Aggrandising coping mode?

Also note what feelings their ways of being evoke in you and how you feel pulled to respond. Your reactions can help you understand the
feelings and behaviour your client is likely to elicit from other people, and thus inform your formulation of their interpersonal problems.
For example, you may find a client becoming dismissive when you ask more personal questions, leaving you with the urge to back off from
sensitive topics, at the cost of getting to know them better. This may well occur in their other relationships and be a reason that they feel
lonely.

Inventories
Schema inventories are self-report systematic checklists. The following ST assessment inventories can be ordered at http://
www.schematherapy.org/#!place-an-order/c1unj:

+ YSQ-L3: Young Schema Questionnaire - Long Form, 3rd Edition;

+ YSQ-S3: Young Schema Questionnaire - Short Form, 3rd Edition;

+ YPI; Young Parenting Inventory;

+ SMI-1.1: Schema Mode Inventory;

+ YRAI Young-Rygh Avoidance Inventory;

+ YCI: Young Compensation Inventory.


As a routine part of initial assessment clients typically complete a version of the YSQ, a tool for assessing schemas; and the YPI, which
assists with identifying the developmental origins of schemas. These are assigned as homework between assessment sessions.

Norms for the YSQ-S3 are available (Calvete et al., 2013). However, as a guide, scores of 4, 5 or 6 on individual items should be explored
as evidence of a schema. Note, however, that a low mean score on a particular schema does not necessarily indicate its absence, as in some
cases the client may be so biased by the schema perspective that they do not notice its presence or rate it as a problem. This is often the case
with Emotional Deprivation and Unrelenting Standards schemas. Where it is already clear that a client meets the DSM diagnostic criteria for
a BPD diagnosis (APA, 2013), it may be counterproductive to assign the YSQ. These clients typically score highly on most schemas and may
be overwhelmed and distressed at being presented with their YSQ results.

The YPI’s items enquire about clients’ childhood experiences of each of parent in turn. It can be a useful prompt to remembering childhood
experiences. In discussing your client’s responses, it is helpful to ask them to give examples of their parents’ behaviours, to elicit a more fine-
tuned understanding of their unmet needs and the origins of their maladaptive coping. This is also an opportunity to educate your client
about childhood needs, where theirs were unmet.

The SMI-1.1 may also be used to help identify clients’ schema modes. Additionally, the Mode Observation Scale (Bernstein et al., 2009)
provides very helpful descriptions of conceptually distinct modes that you might observe. The YRAI and YCI assess the various ways in
which clients avoid and overcompensate, respectively, for their schemas.

All of these self-report inventories are clinical tools and so results are discussed with clients to obtain an accurate understanding of their
responses, especially where they have strongly endorsed questionnaire items.

Imagery
There is evidence that mental imagery is associated with more emotion than verbal cognition (Holmes & Mathews, 2005, 2010; Holmes et
al., 2006), and that highly affective autobiographical memories are more easily recalled in a visual form (Conway & Pleydell-Pearce, 2000).


Using the ‘imagery for assessment’ method outlined here, you may uncover emotionally important material. This procedure aims to identify
your client’s schemas, to understand their origins in childhood, and help your client emotionally experience the link between the origins of
their schemas and their presenting problems.

You will need to devote a whole session to imagery for assessment (and to start the imagery early in the session) in order to allow sufficient
time for subsequent debriefing and for your client to recover if they have become distressed. Because imagery for assessment can evoke
strong upsetting feelings, and because reparenting (which soothes difficult emotions relationally) is not included in this imagery, start by
establishing a safe place image. This can then be turned to, if required, to calm difficult emotions. Childhood imagery is not undertaken
with very fragile clients exhibiting high levels of risk until they have a trusting therapeutic bond with you, one that allows them to receive
soothing and feel safe by turning to you.

This is what you can say to your client:

Today I'd like to do something a little different, if it’s OK with you - to use a visualisation method in order for us to get a deeper understanding
of your schemas. This kind of mental imagery can allow us to get more of a felt sense of your schemas, and to help us understand where they
came from and how they affect you now. First I'll guide you to a ‘Safe Place’ image - one where you feel content and at peace. We'll return to
this at the end of the exercise. Then I'll guide you to an image from your childhood and then we'll return to the safe place. How does that sound
to you?

After addressing any concerns and obtaining their consent, proceed along the following lines (adapted from Young et al., 2003, p. 80).
When you ask the following questions, pause to allow your client to answer them aloud.


1. ‘Close your eyes. Picture yourself in a safe place, any place where you feel at peace, content. It may be at home, by the water, in the
mountains or somewhere imaginary. Notice the details and make the image as vivid as possible. What do you see? Hear? Smell? Feel on
your skin? How do you feel?’

2. ‘Keeping your eyes closed, wipe out this image and now picture yourself as a child, 10 years old or younger, in an upsetting situation
with one of your parents. Let the image come on its own - let it show itself to you.’

3. When clients indicate that they have an image, say ‘Tell me what you see, as if you're there right now. If clients slip into the past tense
at any point in imagery, gently nudge them back into the present tense. Ask the following, as necessary, in order to elicit a detailed vivid
picture.

+ ‘Where are you? Describe your surroundings.’

+‘Who else is there?’

+ ‘How old are you?”

+ ‘What's happening in the image that’s making you upset?’
+ ‘What's the look on your parent's face?’

+ ‘What are they feeling? Thinking?’

+ ‘What do they feel towards you?’

+ ‘What are you feeling in this situation?’

+ ‘What thoughts are going through your mind?’

4, ‘Carry on a dialogue between you and your parent. What do you say? What do they say? What happens next? Let the scene continue until
it reaches a natural conclusion.’


5. ‘Consider how you would like your parent to change or be different in this image so that you would be happier and calmer even if it
seems impossible (for example, would you like them to be more emotionally sturdy, more affectionate, less harsh). Now tell your parent
in the image how you would like him or her to change, using the words of a child: “Mum, I need you to...’

6. ‘How does your parent react? What happens next? Keep the image going until the scene ends. How do you feel now?’

7.'Now, with your eyes still closed, focus only on the feelings you have in this image, noticing also the feelings in your body, and make
them stronger. Keeping hold of these feelings, wipe away the image of yourself as a child and picture a situation in your current life in
which you have a similar feeling

8. When they indicate that they have a current-day image, say ‘Where are you? What's happening? What are you feeling? Thinking?’

9. ‘Is there anyone there with you?’ If so, ‘What is the expression on their face? What is he or she feeling? What is the other person thinking
to him or herself?’

10. ‘Let the image continue as if it’s a scene in a film. Carry on a dialogue between you and the other person. What do you say? What do they
say? What happens next? Let the image continue until it reaches a natural conclusion.’

11. ‘Tell the other person in this image how you would like him or her to be different in this situation so that would be happier and calmer,
even if it seems impossible. How do they react?’

12. ‘Keeping your eyes closed, wipe out this image and return to your safe place. Enjoy the relaxed feeling. Now, open your eyes.’

Then allow your client to talk about their experience of doing this imagery and anything that struck them. Move on to discuss their unmet

needs in the scene and how these are linked to their current schemas or modes and presenting problems.

In undertaking imagery for assessment with Elaine, she remembered the scene in which she was 4 years old and her mother was drunk

and accidentally left her in a shop. The imagery helped her to feel the unmet need for her mum to be reliably present and not abandon her.


She would fear re-experiencing this ‘old’ feeling of being abandoned (her Abandonment schema) whenever she got close to someone. She
coped with this by never completely relying on anyone.
Case conceptualisation
It is helpful to integrate the understandings of your client that are gained through the assessment process into an overarching formulation
using the ST Case Conceptualisation Form in Table 29.4.
Drawing out a mode map (see Elaine’s mode map in Figure 29.1 for an example) with your client as you identify their modes provides

a visual summary that can be referred to and developed throughout therapy. This can also provide a means of orienting your client to the
overarching goals of therapy: to strengthen their ‘Healthy Adult’ mode to meet the needs of their ‘Little Side’ mode, moderate or weaken their
maladaptive coping modes and diminish the salience and impact of their toxic parent modes.
Table 29.4 Schema therapy case conceptualisation form

Background Information

Therapist’s Name:

Patient's Name:

Age:

Marital/Partner Status:

Children (Ages):

Occupation:

Ethnic Background/Country of:

Education:


Overall Level of Functioning:

Axis I Symptoms or Diagnoses (Include Severity)
1.

2.

3.

Current Major Problems and Life Patterns
Problem 1:

Life Pattern:

Problem 2:

Life Pattern:

Problem 3:

Life Pattern:

Developmental Origins (mother, father, siblings, peers)
1.

2.

3.

Core Childhood Memories or Images

1.

2.

3.

4.


Most Relevant Schemas with Origins (link with origins above)
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Current Schema Triggers (specify M-F if limited to men or women)
1.

2.

3.

4.

Surrender Behaviours

1.

2.

3.

Avoidance Behaviours

1.

2.

3.

Overcompensating Behaviours
1.


2.
3.
Relevant Schema Modes
1.
2.
3.
4.
Possible Temperamental/Biological Factors
Core Cognitions and Distortions
1.
2.
3.
Therapy Relationship (impact of schemas and modes on in-session behaviour; personal reactions to patient; quality of bond; unmet
needs to be provided in limited reparenting)
Focus and Plan for Change
Note: Revised Schema Therapy Case Conceptualisation Form Copyright 2007. Reprinted with permission of Jeffrey Young, PhD. Schema Therapy Institute, 36 W. 44th
St., Ste. 1007, New York, NY 10036.
Exclusion criteria
In its current form, ST is not designed for clients with psychosis; acute, severe untreated axis | disorders (as they were termed in DSM-IV
(APA, 2000)); moderate-severe alcohol or drug misuse; or if presenting problems have arisen out of a life circumstance unrelated to a long-


standing life pattern. If your client is facing a major life crisis you may need to help them stabilise or resolve the crisis before they undertake
ST.
Treatment in schema therapy
From the wide range of interventions used in ST, the following will be described next:

+ Psychoeducation

+ Limited reparenting

+ Imagery

+ Chair work

+ Cognitive strategies

+ Behavioural pattern breaking

+ Use of therapy relationship in sessions.
Psychoeducation
Direct your clients to the book Reinventing Your Life (Young & Klosko, 1994) at the outset of the assessment process. It can be helpful to
recommend that they initially read chapters 1-5 and chapter 17, which outlines the ST approach. In this book schemas are referred to as
‘lifetraps’. Chapters 6-16 each focus on one (or sometimes two) lifetraps. You can suggest that your clients just read the schema-specific
chapters that are relevant to them.


Limited reparenting
Limited reparenting involves providing your client, within appropriate boundaries, with corrective emotional experiences in which
emotional needs, previously unmet by parental figures, are at least partially met. These new experiences serve as antidotes to your client's
unmet needs and have a schema healing effect. You aim, therefore, to embody the qualities and functions of a good parent, establishing a
secure attachment relationship and, in doing so, model to your client a Healthy Adult mode. Even after skilled intervention, the rigidity of
some clients’ coping modes can block access to the Vulnerable Child, limiting the impact of your reparenting. However, this can still achieve
partial schema healing and some symptom relief, which, along with the understanding that a good formulation provides, are often greatly
appreciated by the client.
Reparenting the Vulnerable Child
In large part, limited reparenting is the stance taken towards the Vulnerable Child side of your client. Reparenting a client in their Vulnerable
Child mode, depending on their unmet needs, may include the following interventions:

+ Offering natural compassionate responses (e.g. as an antidote to Emotional Deprivation and Defectiveness);

+ Being predictable, reliable and transparent (e.g. as an antidote to Abandonment and Mis- trust/Abuse);

+» Making appropriate self-disclosure (e.g. as an antidote to Emotional Inhibition);

+ Using transitional objects to maintain connection with you;

+ Providing contact between sessions.


Compassionate responses
Offer natural compassionate responses to show that you are attuned to your client’s feelings (e.g. ‘How awful’; ‘I’m sad you had to go
through that’; ‘Go you"). You might also move physically closer to clients to show that you're drawn towards them when they show more
vulnerability, as an antidote to Emotional Deprivation or Emotional Inhibition. Alternatively, with a client with an unmet need for safety,
you may express a desire to protect them from mistreatment. For some clients, you might provide them with guidance they crave, providing
an antidote to emotional deprivation of attunement, protection and guidance.
Being predictable, reliable and transparent
It is particularly important to provide clients with Mistrust/Abuse and Abandonment schemas with an experience of transparent and
reliable care. You may express this by being on time for sessions, giving plenty of advance notice of when you are going on leave, and being
clear and open about different therapeutic options and strategies.
Self-disclosure
You may use appropriate self-disclosure to help your clients feel an emotional connection to you, to validate their feelings and to model a
healthy negotiation of their schemas. Here are some examples of appropriate self-disclosure.

+ ‘I'd feel just the same if someone said that to me.’

+ ‘When you let me in to your sadness | feel closer to you - and I like that.’

+ ‘Something similar happened to me when I was studying, | felt like I couldn't get down to work because I was convinced I couldn't do it, so

I would avoid it altogether. Now I know if I keep working even if I’m stressed I'll get to the other side.’


-‘I know right now you feel like you’re worthless, unlikeable and lazy, but I don’t experience you that way - I think you're great and I look
forward to our sessions. | also think you're really doing your best and working hard in therapy.’

Transitional objects
You may give a transitional object to clients to maintain their sense of connection with you between sessions. For example you may give
them your pen, or a recording of you saying something encouraging to them.
Between-session contact
You may offer clients contact between sessions, within defined parameters (e.g. leaving a message within working hours), at times of
difficulty (e.g. suicidal urges, job loss or relationship breakdown) or where there is a particular need for connection (e.g. emailing after
achieving a challenging homework task). For clients who are at risk, planned contact with you (e.g. leaving a voicemail message) should
be supplemented with an agreed plan for a more immediate response (e.g. phoning an on-call mental health team, or going to a hospital
accident and emergency department).

Reparenting may also involve the use of imagery and chair work, both of which are described later in this chapter.

Elaine's therapist understood her unmet childhood needs for attunement, attention, encouragement, reliability and guidance. She aimed
to provide a partial antidote, discerning ‘Little Elaine’s' needs in each session and adapting her stance and strategies accordingly. So,
for example, in the face of intense shame at having self-harmed, her therapist was attuned to her Vulnerable Child mode and provided
protection from the punitive parent message ‘You always screw everything up.’ In another session, just after Elaine had sworn at her boss,
her therapist met her need for some guidance about how to repair the relationship. When Elaine seemed to have benefitted from some
reparenting (e.g. appearing calmer and happier after her therapist had stood up to the punitive parent) her therapist discussed with Elaine
what had helped and encouraged ‘Healthy Elaine’ to do the same for her ‘Little Side’.


Reparenting the Angry Child

In response to an Angry Child mode, reparenting involves encouraging the safe venting of anger; that is, expressing anger without damaging
people, objects or relationships. To reparent a client in this mode, view your client as an angry small child, and position yourself as a caring,
respectful parent who sets appropriate limits.

If your client is angry at you, using a neutral respectful tone, you might say, ‘Tell me why you are angry at me.’ You may then ask ‘What else
are you angry about?’ refraining from responding to the content of what they are saying until their anger has dissipated. You may also need
to set limits. For example you may say, ‘It’s OK for you to be angry, but it is not OK for you to yell or swear at me like that.’ Once the client is
calmer, express empathy for their angry feelings, apologise if appropriate, and try to reach the more vulnerable feelings of hurt, fear, loss or
sadness beneath the anger.

Confront the distorted, exaggerated aspect of the anger, with self-disclosure if relevant. For example you may say, ‘To have better
relationships you need to learn the difference between realistic and exaggerated anger. You've had so much trouble because of exaggerated
anger. I can put up with some exaggerated anger because I'm your therapist, but others won't be so understanding’

If their childlike exaggerated anger is towards someone else, encourage venting of their anger when they are not in the presence of the
person with whom they’re angry. For example, they may express this anger with you or a friend, or by letting it out when they’re on their
own. Then you might consider together if and how to approach the person that has upset them from their Healthy Adult mode.

Empathic confrontation

Empathic confrontation is an integral part of reparenting. It involves expressing empathy for a coping mode or schema-driven point of
view while clearly pointing out the cost of this and the concomitant behaviours to the client's well-being and relationships. (This issue is
discussed later in the section on use of relationship patterns in session.)


Limit-setting
Reparenting may also involve limit-setting. This may serve as an antidote to clients having been given inconsistent or insufficient limits as
achild. Examples of the latter include permissive parenting in which their demands and protests at not wanting to do something were too
readily given in to too readily; or neglect, such that they got away with breaking rules or were allowed age-inappropriate freedoms because
their parents were absent. Such failures in parenting may give rise to Entitlement (believing rules that apply to others don’t apply to them),
Insufficient Self-Control (through not learning to tolerate and move through the discomfort of doing things they don’t feel like doing), failure
(successes often require discomfort tolerance) or Dependency (not having autonomy encouraged where this is appropriate yet may cause
discomfort) schemas, and avoidant or overcompensatory coping modes. Thus, setting limits, firmly and non-punitively, can be an important
reparenting function
Reparenting according to specific unmet needs and schemas
It is important to be guided by the formulation of your client's unmet needs, as reparenting may mean one thing for one client and
something quite different for another. For example, with a client who as a child lacked age-appropriate guidance (an aspect of emotional
deprivation) and was overstretched with responsibilities beyond their capacity, reparenting would involve offering them direct guidance.
However, a client with a Dependence/Incompetence schema will lack confidence in their ability to find solutions and make decisions
independently, and look to others for solutions, thus keeping them from developing a sense of their own competence. With such a client,
reparenting will involve holding back from offering guidance. It will instead involve encouraging them to generate and try out solutions and
to make decisions independently, in order to strengthen their sense of autonomy.

Here are some other examples of matching reparenting interventions to specific schemas associated with particular unmet needs and
related schemas.


+ For clients with an Unrelenting Standards schema, reparenting may involve valuing the therapeutic relationship more than ‘getting things
done’, and praising clients for engaging in playfulness in sessions.

+ For clients with a Subjugation schema, reparenting may involve praising clients for expressing their feelings or preferences in the therapy.
For example, if they tell you they feel you've not quite understood how important something is to them you might say, ‘I'm so glad you told
me that. I know it’s not easy to let me know when I've misunderstood you and I really want to hear how things are for you.’

+ For clients with an Insufficient Self-Control/Self-Discipline schema, reparenting may involve saying ‘no’ to your client if, for example, they
ask if they can take their shoes off in the session or for extra session time.

Further examples, of reparenting associated with specific unmet needs and schemas can be found in Young et al. (2003, pp. 203-204).

For you to sustain a therapeutic reparenting relationship with your client, it is vital that you are clear about and remain within the bounds
of a professional relationship and the limits of what you are personally comfortable with and can maintain. Discussing this in supervision
and being aware of your own schemas and coping responses can be vital in finding the ‘right’ balance. Be particularly careful about
overextending yourself if you have a Self-Sacrifice schema (which is common amongst therapists), accepting that you can’t meet all of your
clients’ needs.

Over time, ST predicts that the therapist's reparenting stance becomes internalised by clients as part of their Healthy Adult mode. This
becomes a strong foundation for the establishment of autonomy, in the same way that when early childhood attachment needs are met by
parents, a sense of their nurturing and reliable presence becomes internalised and facilitates healthy development towards autonomy.
Imagery
In addition to using imagery for assessment purposes, we can harness the power of imagery to promote emotional change. Imagining a


future event can increase how likely we think it is to occur and visualising undertaking an activity has been shown to increase the likelihood
of doing it (Holmes & Mathews, 2010). Further, participants who imagined positive scenarios reported greater positive mood than those who
‘thought about the words and meanings’ of the same positive descriptions (Holmes et al., 2006). Imagery can be used therapeutically in ST to:
+ Create an imagined ‘safe place’ that your client can summon in times of distress.
+ Raise emotional awareness of unmet needs in childhood and the origins of schemas and modes.
+ Provide partial healing of past unmet needs and traumas through imaginal reparenting, first from the therapist and later the client's
Healthy Adult.
+ Rehearse desired behavioural changes, visualising their Healthy Adult mode helping their ‘Little Side’, negotiating with relevant coping
modes and then enacting the wanted healthy behaviours.
The following is an extract from a reparenting in imagery exercise in session 12 with Elaine (E). The therapist (T) guides her to her safe place
and then to a memory of an upsetting scene from her childhood, connecting with her emotions (sadness, loneliness, shame) and unmet
needs (nurturance and acceptance). The therapist then ‘rescripts’ the scene, attuning to and validating her emotions, meeting her needs
and attributing the problem to her mother’s issues rather than to any innate flaw in Elaine. Given the stage of therapy, Elaine has already
experienced imagery and established a safe place image to move to if needed. On first undertaking an exercise of this kind, it is important to
provide a clear rationale and framework for imagery, so your client knows what to expect and that they can stop at any time.
E: This week should have been OK. I've managed to do a bit more and I haven't burnt myself at all. I still feel like a pile of crap though. The
feeling just won't go away.
T: I know, it's such a familiar feeling for you. It’s hard to escape even when you're doing well. Would you like us to focus on this today, or is
there something else you want us to think about?
E: Yeah, I'd like to focus on this.


T: Ok, how would you feel about doing some imagery to help with the feeling?

E: That would be good.

T: OK, close your eyes. Tell me more about the feeling. What is it and where in your body do you feel it?

E: | feel it in the pit of my stomach - a feeling of being bad. I’m a bit angry too - angry at myself for being the way I am.

T: Great. Now hold on to that feeling, amplify it if you can, and allow an image of yourself as a little girl, age 10 or younger, to show itself
to you. When you see something, let me know.

E: I'm in our old flat, in the living room and my mum's asleep on the sofa. I want to wake her because I'm really upset because my sister
keeps calling me a retard over and over, but I’m scared - [ think mum will be angry if I wake her.

T: How old are you?

E: About 6.

T: And what happens now?

E:1 shake her a little bit and she starts to wake up. She looks annoyed. She says, ‘What’s the matter?’ And I tell her what Liz said.

T: And what does she say?

E: She says that she can’t believe I woke her up for that. That me and my sister need to sort it our ourselves, that | need to toughen up and
stop telling tales.

T: Go ahead and be her voice, in the tone she's speaking.

E: ‘You know I need my sleep - why did you wake me? You're so selfish, I'm sick of you acting like such a baby.’ Then she turns over, so she’s
got her back to me.

T: How are you feeling?

E: | feel horrible. She’s right - I should toughen up, I shouldn’t have woken her.

T: Elaine, can you bring me into the image? Picture me there with you.


E: Yes.

T: Where are we?

E: We're sitting on the armchair.

T: Are we sitting next to each other or are you on my lapor ... ?

E: We're sitting next to each other.

T: Ok, that’s good. We can talk to your mum in a bit, but right now I want to hear how you are feeling?

E: | feel awful. 1 want my mum to hug me but I know she won't.

T: With me here, could you tell your mum what you're feeling and what you need to feel a bit better? ‘Mum, I need you to ...’

E: I’m not sure, [ think she'll be angry with me.

T: Oh I see. How can we make it safe for you to say how you feel to your mum?

E: 1 don't know.

T: [could stand beside you and stop your mum if she becomes angry with you. Or we could have a glass wall that she can hear you through?
Or something else?

E: I think it’s OK if you're there.

T: Are you ready to tell your mum, ‘Mum, I'm feeling ...’

E: (Starts crying) ‘Mum, I'm really upset. I need you to look after me. Don’t go back to sleep.’

T: How is she reacting? What's she saying?

E: She says it's time for me to grow up and stop being such a cry-baby.

T: Elaine, can I talk to your mum in the image?

E: OK.

T: ‘Nancy, why are you talking to Elaine like this? Can’t you see how upset she is?’


E: She says you should mind your own business, that you don't know how difficult lam.

T: ‘I would mind my own business if you were looking after Elaine properly. But you're not. I don’t think she’s difficult. She's only 6 and it's
horrible her sister keeps calling her a retard - she needs you to look after her. I know you've got a lot on your plate right now, but it’s not fair
on her to put her down and ignore her. It's no way to treat a little girl. It makes her feel she’s not good enough and that she doesn't matter.
And that’s not true. She matters a lot and there's nothing wrong with her - I know her really well and she's very sweet.’ How is your mum
reacting, Elaine?

E: 1 think she knows you're right but she can’t admit it. She’s pretending not to hear you.

T: Do you want us to say anything else to her?

E: No - I want her to go.

T: OK. ‘Nancy, please can you go now. We don't need you here any more.’ Can you see her leave?

E: Yes.

T: How are you feeling?

E: I feel good, no one has ever stood up to her like that (smiles). It’s nice having someone look out for me.

The therapist went on to ask what Elaine wanted next. She wanted to play, as is typical once the ‘Little Side’ of our clients have their needs
met. They played together in the image briefly before the therapist invited Elaine to open her eyes, asked how she felt and how she found the
imagery.

In discussing the imagery with Elaine, the therapist made links to her schemas and unmet needs. For example, her mum was invalidating
of ‘Little Elaine's’ need for her and punitive in accusing her of being selfish and acting like a baby, engendering Defectiveness/Shame and
Emotional Deprivation schemas. In the image, Elaine experienced her therapist validating and responding to her needs: to be listened to,
cared for, liked, valued and protected from her mum’s anger, and to know it was her mum that was in the wrong, not her. Elaine's emotional


shift to feeling good and smiling indicated that her emotional needs in that moment were met. She and her therapist thus identified these as
needs to be met in her current life.

As therapy progressed, ‘Big Elaine’ entered imagery scenes such as the one just mentioned to reparent ‘Little Elaine’, alongside and then in
place of her therapist.

Imagery is most effective when the client is fully immersed within the imagined scene so that they are seeing, hearing, feeling and
thinking as if they were present, rather than observing or analysing the scene from a distance. To enable this, the therapist should guide the
client into the field perspective by saying, for example, ‘Put yourself into the scene, as if it were happening now,’ and asking, ‘What can you
see? What time of day is it? What are you feeling? What happens now?’ These questions can help the client visualise images more vividly.
Clients sometimes feel anxious at not being able to remember a childhood scene very clearly. If this occurs, the therapist can reassure them
that it’s OK to imagine something as best they can, as the aim is to help them connect with their feelings, rather than being exactly accurate.

Imagery can also be used to help clients rehearse a desired change in their behaviour or reactions. When using this method, you first
make sense of the relevant modes blocking your client from making a desired, healthy change and identify what they need from their ‘Big
Side’ in this particular situation. Then guide them to imagine being in a scene in which they would like to behave in new ways. Have them
picture activated modes as separate characters and conduct a dialogue between these, such that the Healthy Adult mode meets the needs of
the ‘Little Side’ and overcomes any maladaptive coping or toxic parent modes. Then ask your client to imagine, in detail, making the desired
change. The following is a brief extract of such work with Elaine:

T: Can you picture Angry Little Elaine and Big Elaine there in the warehouse?

E: Yes, just about - feels a bit strange.

T: Yes, sure. What does your Angry Side look like?

E: She looks like me but younger and very angry, like she might start shouting.

T: Be her - what does she say about your plan of being polite to your boss, Jon?


E: ‘I have to shout at him, I can’t hold it in.’

T: Have Big Elaine talk to your angry Little Side.

E: ‘It’s not a good idea. | know we don't like him much but he’s just doing his job and if we swear at him again we're going to lose our job.’

T: What's happening now?

E: She thinks I'm being soft.

T: Have Big Elaine talk to her and suggest a better way forward.

E: ‘I know you're angry and I’m here for you - but it’s too big a cost to shout at him. I promise we can talk about it later when we get home
from work.

T: How's Little Elaine now?

E: She's OK, still a bit angry but she's not going to shout.
Chair work
Chair work involves allocating different modes to empty chairs in the therapy room, enabling a clear separation of the different modes or
‘sides’ at play in a particular struggle or problem. In affording modes a fuller, embodied and emotionally felt expression, chair work leads to
new insights into a mode's characteristics. It can be particularly healing for the Vulnerable Child mode. It also reinforces to the client the idea
that their maladaptive coping and toxic parent modes are separate from their core self (represented in the Healthy adult and child modes).
Chair work is used to modify maladaptive coping and toxic parent modes, provide child modes with corrective reparenting experiences and
strengthen the Healthy Adult mode. There are many different ways chair work can be utilised in ST. Just two are outlined here.
Chair work with coping modes
Chair work is useful when addressing the presence of coping modes within therapy sessions. Invite the client initially to talk from the point


of view of their coping mode. You interview it to uncover the mode's functions and how it is detrimental to the client. Then you invite their
Healthy Adult side to challenge the coping mode. Chair work is particularly useful in addressing avoidant coping modes as they arise in
session, as it is vital to bypass these in order to reach and reparent the client's child modes. Chair work for this purpose typically involves the
following steps.

1, Notice cues or signs that the client is in a coping mode, and help the client to recognise these. For example, you might say, ‘You're talking
about the distressing things that have that have happened to you, but in a matter-of-fact way. I’m guessing that there are some feelings
here, but it seems you've switched off from them and gone into a sort of detached mode, perhaps to protect yourself in some way?’

2. Having together identified the presence of this mode, if you have not already done so in a previous session, find a name that
characterises the mode. For example, if the client is in the Detached Protector mode, the client may opt to name this their ‘Numb’,
‘Blocker’ or ‘Intellectualiser’ mode. Say ‘I'd like to understand this side better. Would you be willing to talk to me from that side, sitting
in another chair?’

3. Ask your client to sit in a different chair, labelling it their ‘Numb’, ‘Blocker’ or ‘Intellectualiser’ mode and inviting them to ‘be that mode,
completely taking on its perspective, talking with its voice.’

4, Now interview the mode to understand it better. For example you might ask the client, being their Detached Protector: ‘I'd like to learn
more about you; what happened today to get you to show up? How are you helping Dave? Why is it important for Dave to have you
around? Why do you feel you need to be here right now, in the session with me? What would it be like for Dave to talk more openly about
his feelings to me? Why would that be a bad thing?’ Express understanding and empathy for the maladaptive coping mode's attempts
to protect the client.


5. Explore the childhood development of this mode. For example you might ask: ‘When did you start to be present in Dave's life? What
was going on at the time? Why do you think you learned to be this particular way? How did it help Dave as a child?’ Empathise with the
adaptive value of the maladaptive coping mode during the client's childhood.

6. Ask if the maladaptive coping mode has any less desirable effects on the client. For example you might ask: ‘Can you see any ways in
which you have been less helpful to Dave?’ Express your concern for the effects it has on your client. You might, for instance, point out
how it keeps the client lonely, not properly understood, blocks them from knowing what they feel and need, keeps the client at a distance
from others so that their ‘Little Side’ cannot get its needs met.

7. Empathising again with the maladaptive coping mode's reasons for being present, ask what they need in order to feel ready to step
aside and give you (the therapist) access to Dave's feelings. Provide assurances that address their concerns. For example, you may say, ‘I
understand you are worried that Dave will feel overwhelmed and out of control if he starts to talk openly, but I promise we are going to
take this slowly, and check in regularly to see how he’s doing.’

8. Invite the client to return to their original chair. Then sit opposite the client in the maladaptive coping mode chair and role-play this
aspect or side of the client. As you play the maladaptive coping mode role, ask your client to respond to you from the Healthy Adult mode
or perspective as you have just demonstrated, until you, in the role of the maladaptive coping mode, feel weakened

9. Move back into your therapist chair and debrief.

Chair work can help your client understand how their maladaptive coping modes developed as a valid attempt to cope with their
childhood unmet needs but have unintended negative consequences in current situations and relationships. Chair work also helps clients
begin to develop alternative, less destructive and more adaptive ways of addressing situations that typically trigger maladaptive coping
modes.


Chair work with toxic parent modes

Chair work is also a powerful way of addressing toxic parent modes. Consider using chair work when it is evident from the client's critical
or demanding way of thinking about themselves that such a mode is present. The following steps may be used in chair work to address the
Punitive Parent mode.

1, Identify the presence of the Punitive Parent mode and obtain consent to work with it using chairs.

2. Ask the client to sit in a chair that represents their Punitive Parent mode. Identify another chair to represent their Vulnerable Child
mode. Invite the client to fully voice their Punitive Parent mode messages to the empty Vulnerable Child mode chair. For example, the
client in the Punitive Parent mode chair may say, ‘You're just a useless piece of dirt. Why would anyone want to be with you?’ and so
forth.

3. Invite the client to move to the Vulnerable Child mode chair. Ask the client to express fully how this side of them feels, being on the
receiving end of the Punitive Parent mode messages. Direct their attention to their emotions, and invite them to fully experience and
express these. For example, the client may feel small, disgusting, ashamed.

4, Intervene as a protective parent would, first speaking to the empty Punitive Parent mode chair, calmly and firmly matching the strength
of the punitive parent in your tone. For example, you might say authoritatively, ‘Stop that. How can you say that? Elaine is not a useless
piece of dirt, she’s a thoughtful, generous person who | like being with. I will not let you speak to her like that.’

5. Turn then to the Vulnerable Child mode chair in which the client is sitting. With the tenderness you would use towards a child, ask the
client how they are feeling. Respond directly with expressions of care as you would a child. For example, if they say, ‘Shaken but I felt
better when you stood up for me,’ you might say, ‘Yes, that voice is horrible but I’m here to protect you now.’


6. Invite the client to sit in a chair that's designated as their Healthy Adult mode. Remind them of what the Punitive Parent just said, and
invite them respond as a strong, protective parent would towards the Punitive Parent mode chair. Then, invite the client to turn to the
Vulnerable Child mode chair to comfort, affirm and reassure this part of themselves.

7. Debrief.

This type of chair work enables clients to hear the punitive and demanding distortions of their toxic parent modes and gain deeper insight
into the distress these modes typically cause them. They also gain practice summoning their Healthy Adult mode to protect and attune to
the needs for their Little Side, pushing to one side their toxic parent mode.

Chair work to consolidate the Healthy Adult mode

Therapists and clients may conduct a dialogue between modes as a conversation, in order for the client to hear fully from different sides
of themselves. This technique is particularly effective in consolidating a healthy adult response to a coping mode, as role-played by the
therapist. The following is an extract from session 30 with Elaine. She has come to a well-balanced conclusion that she doesn’t want to visit
her mother that Sunday, but her Compliant Surrender mode (which she refers to as Appeasing Elaine) is making her doubt her decision.

T: How about I play the Appeasing side and you play Healthy Elaine?

E: OK.

T: (Moves into a chair that represents ‘Appeasing Elaine’) ‘You've got to go to your mum’s on Sunday. She'll be really angry if you don't and
she'll not talk to you for weeks.’

E: ‘I don’t have to go, I've had enough of you telling me I always need to put her first, that I have to put everyone else first.’

T: ‘But it'll cost you. Go, just this once, to keep the peace.’

E: ‘I've had enough of keeping the peace.’


T: (As an aside, ina quieter tone, coaching Elaine) Good, tell me what you're going to do instead

E: I’m going to tell Mum that I'm busy this Sunday but I'll see her in a week or two.
Cognitive strategies
Cognitive strategies help clients to develop rational (Healthy Adult mode) understandings of how their schemas or modes operate and
adaptive responses based on new insights into their core needs. Many cognitive techniques employed in ST are similar to those used in
cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT). Four CBT techniques commonly used in ST are schema flash cards, positive logbooks, mode mapping and
schema mode diaries. Other cognitive strategies used in ST are well described elsewhere and include the pros and cons analysis, historical
testing of schema, pie charts and the courthouse method (Arntz & Genderen, 2009; Arntz & Jacob, 2012; Young et al., 2003).

Cognitive techniques are practised in sessions initially and then set as between-session homework. Cognitive strategies are introduced
to clients when they are predominantly in their Healthy Adult mode. This is because when a client’s schemas or maladaptive modes are
strongly activated they tend to resist invitations to think more rationally and flexibly. In such cases, their felt experience within the relevant
activated schema or mode is likely to need attention first. For example, if a client is in an Angry Protector mode following an argument with
aneighbour, the client might be too angry to access their Healthy Adult mode and engage with cognitive techniques. In this case, chair work
may allow the client to feel and express the perspective and function of this Angry Protector mode. Only after this might the client be able to
consider a healthy adult perspective to address the conflict with neighbours. This could then be consolidated using a cognitive strategy such
as using a schema flash card. If a client is in a Detached Protector mode, cognitive techniques are likely to be ineffective as they will not reach
the emotions that are driving the unwanted thinking, urges or behaviours.

Flash cards
Flash cards are developed in session for your client's use in their day-to-day life. They summarise their Healthy Adult mode’s response to


commonly occurring schema triggers. They typically capture the essence of a new, healthy insight experienced during a therapy session.
When the schema-trigger recurs, the client pulls out their flashcard to help them access this healthy perspective. The outline of a flashcard is
given in Table 29.5. A briefer version may be a written on a small card. One side contains the schema or maladaptive mode's message or point
of view. For example, on the Punitive Parent side of a flash card might be written: ‘You're just a useless piece of dirt. Why would anyone want
to be with you?’ On the other, the healthy response might be, ‘You [on the other side of this card] are the Punitive voice. You are horrible and
I’m not going to listen to you anymore. Little Elaine, I’m here for you, you matter to me, I like you and other people care about us too. We're
going to be OK’ Flash cards can also be recorded, for example, in a phone message, in your voice or your client's, according to what the client
feels is more potent.

Table 29.5 Schema flashcard

doen taint

ennpege corse fring Scegpvines

wee wen var

heaityouteenadtrmenes Uh a ay my eee make A rid eatin

awe

oN otoema nabs wae ennggeaer a Bepentowes “peertine sheng

from amg eve pepe bt

Pees ate ety nee

Phe idem ey Ue apres oa heb the ft had “net nr

ekarioeeToeebet, eve tft cps there

Ceosidiarent eearactor ay

ap Bann Fm ange AIR CS Kagan weeh rman, Wry Ne ING Clie me RiNe RAL wo HMA mena FD Sa TMaungry Me, HE HAN Pa SEY tlre Rah RT BOE “vn
Positive log books
A log book can increase clients’ awareness and appreciation of their strengths, efforts and positive experiences. It is a record of any


positive actions, events or experiences in their day-to-day lives (see Arntz & Genderen, 2009, p. 106, for an example). Positive logs can
serve as an antidote to the Punitive Parent mode's dismissal or diminution of clients’ positive personal qualities or to a Pessimism schema’s
minimisation of positive experiences. Healthy attempts to get valid needs met (e.g. texting a friend to go for coffee) are to be noted even if
they fail to elicit the desired response (e.g. the friend says they are busy) as they remain desirable actions and may be opportunities for your
client to learn how to negotiate obstacles and disappointment.
Mode maps
Mode maps provide a memorable formulation summary. Elaine’s mode map is given in Figure 29.1. Having the client's mode map available
during sessions for reference can help identify modes that are manifested in a presenting problem (for example, Elaine’s Appeasing mode in
feeling she should go to her mother's) or as they arise during the session (for example, a client becoming withdrawn from you as they move
into their Detached Protector mode). Mode maps may be particularly useful when empathically confronting a coping made, as it provides a
visual message that you are challenging their mode, not criticising them as a whole person.
Schema diaries
Schema diaries are used to help clients identify when their schemas are triggered and work through associated thoughts, feelings and coping
behaviours (see Young et al., 2003, p. 108 for an example). They act to increase the client’s awareness of how their schema-based reactions
are disproportionately strong and of common characteristics across trigger events. For example, in keeping a schema diary, Elaine noticed
that whenever people around her were quiet she would think they didn’t like her, feel she couldn't trust them, and withdraw from them.
She was able to see that her responses were driven by her Emotional Deprivation schema rather than a realistic appraisal of other peoples’
feelings towards her.

In their schema diaries clients also acknowledge realistic concerns, distinguish these from over-reactions, generate healthy alternative
perspectives and identify healthy behaviours. As therapy progressed, Elaine was able to use her schema diary to consider and try out the


more adaptive response when her Emotional Deprivation schema was triggered: ‘I know I’m feeling hurt and thinking she doesn't like me,
but that’s my schema talking. I'm going to be brave and say “hello” as normal.’
Behavioural pattern breaking
Problematic behaviours or self-defeating behaviour patterns are most often manifestations of a coping mode, but can also stem from the
Angry or Impulsive Child modes. Typically a behavioural focus is taken after clients can identify the schemas or modes associated with
the undesirable behaviour and have a sufficiently developed Healthy Adult mode to diminish the effects of relevant maladaptive coping or
toxic parent modes. So for example, Elaine was able to focus her efforts on reducing her self-harm once her Healthy Adult mode understood
and could protect her against the Punitive Parent mode message (‘You are fat and disgusting’) and negotiate with her Escape mode, which
promised relief and distraction from her shame.
ST draws upon a wide array of strategies from CBT and other therapies including:
+ Diaphragmatic breathing training;
+ Relaxation exercises;
+ Mindfulness exercises;
+ Assertiveness training;
+ Social skills training;
+ Graded exposure;
+ Behavioural experiments;
+ Problem solving (tightly define the problem; brainstorm solutions with no evaluation; then evaluate ideas; decide on, and carry out the
best plan; review effectiveness in order to generate alternative, healthy responses);


+ Motivational interviewing;
+ Scheduling activities that provide connection with others, enjoyment, fun or a sense of achievement

Many of these strategies are discussed in Chapter 3 on CBT. Motivational interviewing is discussed in Chapter 24 on alcohol and substance
use.

Sometimes clients have no concept of alternative, healthy ways to act to meet their needs effectively. In such instances, you may need to
demonstrate such new behaviours, e.g. in role-play with your client. Then they might practise and experiment with new ways of acting with
you before trying these out with others.

You may encourage clients to alter their ways of interacting with you. For example, if they have a strong Compliant Surrenderer mode, you
might work with them on letting you know anything they dislike about what you say or suggest and encourage them to tell you things that
they would like you to do differently. It would be important to give them a schema-correcting response by praising them for expressing their
preferences and accommodating these if you are able to do this.

Some modes are particularly self-reinforcing, such as the Undisciplined Child mode or behaviourally avoidant modes, which provide
a strong sense of relief. Conversely, acting in opposition to these modes might feel strongly aversive in the short term. Therefore, to
provide sufficient motivation, adequate reinforcement contingencies may need to be put in place such that the desired new behaviours
are experienced with greater reward and the old coping behaviours paired with greater ‘punishment’. For example, a client who struggles
with self-discipline may decide to reward themselves with a coffee only after they have opened their personal mail and binned or filed it as
appropriate. You may have a client who avoids doing anything unless they feel sure of perfect success. If they persistently avoid attempting
agreed therapy homework, you might together agree that a next session with you is conditional upon them at least partially completing a
homework assignment. You would then make a point of praising them for bringing in imperfectly done homework.


Use of therapy relationship in session

The therapy relationship provides a unique opportunity for clients to understand and change the ways their schemas and modes operate in
their other relationships, as these are likely to be present in their interactions with you. For example, a client surrendering to an Entitlement
schema may change sessions at short notice, reflecting a pervasive pattern of putting their own needs or preferences above those of others.
Such enactments of a mode can usefully be explored by inviting your client to step back and consider with you, from a Healthy Adult mode
perspective, ‘What just happened?’ This provides an opportunity to attune to the client's live experience; to feed back the impact of their
behaviour on you; and to make links with other relationships in which this mode arises.

When you first notice a therapeutic rupture, try to identify what the client is doing (their coping behaviour) that is off-putting for you.
Then describe their behaviour in a simple, personal, objective and non-punitive manner and ask for their thoughts and feelings about what
just happened. Here are some examples.

1, ‘Dave, you've gone quiet, what's coming up for you right now?’

2. ‘Elaine, just then, when I mentioned your boss, I felt a change in your tone, like we were suddenly in an argument - what just happened?’

3. ‘Sandra, I feel a bit of a pressure to agree with you, as if otherwise I'd be against you. What just happened for you as we were talking just

then?’

It can be useful to label the coping mode too, as this typically helps the client to gain some distance from the rupture. Here are some
examples.


1, ‘Elaine, I can’t tell right now whether you really agree with what I've said or not. | don't mean this as a criticism, but I feel whatever I say
you might agree. I wonder if your Appeasing side's come up?’

2.'Tom, when you use that tone, it’s as if what I've said was irrelevant and not good enough. I’m wondering if your Superior mode got
triggered?’

Having identified the schemas or modes involved, help your client identify their function in this particular situation. Here are some

examples.

1,‘Why do you think you used that tone just then?’

2.'Why do you think you're doing that with me, right now? What would be hard about saying you were upset because I hadn't
understood?’

3.'Do you know what might have triggered the Appeasing side just then? How is it trying to help? What would it feel like to tell me you
didn’t agree?’

Empathise with the mode's attempt to meet their needs, while sharing its impact on you and your work together:

1, ‘I know the Hopeless side believes that nothing is going to work and so often says, “Yes, but”, but this leaves me feeling it’s always up to
me to come up with a better solution, rather than us working on it together.’

2.‘lunderstand that your Superior mode is trying to protect you but it has the effect of making me want to distance myself, so I stop really
hearing what you need and you don’t get the best out of me.’


You can then explore relevant parallels within their other relationships. For example, ‘Have you noticed this mode coming up with Dan?
How does it work with him?’ This can increase motivation to change by heightening their awareness of the costs of the mode.

The final stage involves strengthening the client's Healthy Adult mode to meet the needs of their child modes in order to reduce the
intensity of the subsequently arising maladaptive schema/mode. For example, with Tom, who has a Superior mode, you might guide him to
notice and pause when he has the urge to be superior (with you and others) and ask himself how ‘Little Tom’ is feeling and what he needs.
Identifying and meeting these needs in healthy and adaptive ways can be practised in imagery, chair work and in role-play. For example, you
and Tom might identify that he felt slighted and insignificant when you missed his point, and that Little Tom needed reassurance that this
was not intentional and encouragement to explain himself to you without resorting to his Superior side.

In using the therapy relationship for change, it is important to be aware of your own schemas and modes being triggered, and distinguish
these reactions from the client’s contribution to any therapeutic rupture. So for example, you might have an Unrelenting Standards schema
that is triggered by a client giving you constructive feedback about a session, leaving you feeling under great pressure to ‘do a better job’. In
this case, it would important not to challenge the client about their feedback, but instead to work in supervision or personal therapy on your
own schema

There is often a combination of the client's and your own schemas or modes at play in ruptures. For example, a client with an Angry
Protector mode might trigger your Subjugation schema in relation to his persistent lateness, making you hesitant to challenge him for fear of
him becoming angry and rejecting you, a pattern that is also present in his other close relationships. Here, your task is to acknowledge your
contribution to the problem, while also drawing his attention to the impact of his coping mode on you and other people:

Therapist (T): John, we've started really late again. You've explained before about the problems with the buses, but this keeps happening
and I'm feeling frustrated that we don't get to have a full session.

John(J): (Cold, hostile tone) If it bothers you so much, why didn't you tell me before? I’m sick and tired of everyone dancing around me on
eggshells.


T: John, I’m sorry I haven’t brought it up properly before. [ know it’s important for you that people are straight with you. But I notice that
even as we're talking now, your tone is a bit hostile and that makes it harder for me to say what I think.

J: That's not my problem. You're the therapist.

T: True, but I think this hostile edge makes it hard for other people to be open with you too and then you end up feeling people aren’t being
straight with you. What mode do you think is coming up? (Points to his mode map)

J: (Softer tone) This one | guess (pointing to the Angry Protector).

T: Yeah, I think so. And why do you think it came up just then? What was it trying to do?
Session structure and frequency
ST sessions can be thought of as having three parts. First you attune to your client’s present state and their current concerns. You might ask
how their week has been and how they feel right now. Note how they look and come across as they speak, in order to identify what mode
they are in. In this initial time of reconnecting, you would also review therapy homework from the previous session, including any obstacles
to them undertaking this as planned, relating these to any modes that were in operation. You then decide together on a session focus. This
should reflect what is emotionally live for them, which may relate to something that happened between sessions or the mode that they are
exhibiting in the session. If they are in a mode that is likely to inhibit therapeutic work (e.g. detached protector or bully and attack) then
make this the primary focus. This first stage typically takes 10 to 15 minutes, and you then move into addressing the agreed focus for the
session, using ST strategies as appropriate.

At end of each session, allow least 10 minutes to reflect and consolidate the work you have done together and decide on homework that
consolidates or progresses this.


Session frequency

In ST, sessions typically occur weekly, over at least 20 weeks. However, with fragile clients with borderline traits, seeing them twice a week,
initially at least, is recommended. The current evidence base for individual ST for personality disorders is based on treatments consisting
of at least SO sessions. There are as yet no controlled trials of shorter treatments with this client group. Conducting ST over 50 sessions (or
about a year) helps to establish the attachment bond that is so central to the healing process with these clients. Nearer the end of therapy,
session frequency can be decreased gradually, as clients gain more autonomy in applying therapeutic strategies. This gradual decrease in
contact reflects childhood development, moving gradually from a level of dependence to greater independence.

Similarly, at the beginning of therapy, therapists are more directive in steering the therapy process, while remaining collaborative. As
clients develop a greater understanding of themselves and the ST model, you may encourage them to take more of a lead in sessions,
including for example, choice of intervention for an issue they would like to address with you.

Ending therapy
Depending on the setting, the end of therapy may be determined by individual clinical factors or by a generic session contract that is
determined by the service in which you work. Ideally, therapy ends when clients have a good understanding of their modes, can spot them
as they arise and use their Healthy Adult mode to:

+ Nurture their Vulnerable Child mode, having internalised the therapist as a secure attachment figure;

+ Vent and limit-set for their Angry Child mode;

+ Disempower toxic parent modes;

+ Negotiate with maladaptive coping modes to get their core needs met in adaptive ways.


If these criteria are met, it is likely that your client's therapy goals will have in large part been met.

However, if therapy must end before your client has progressed as desired (e.g. if you work in a service that has a relatively short therapy
session contract), empathise with them and work to find ways they might continue to make therapeutic changes by getting needs met in
relationships with others. You might also focus on rehearsing reparenting imagery and developing transitional objects (e.g. personal audio-
recorded ‘flash cards’) in order to strengthen their sense of you that they can carry with them beyond the end of therapy.

The prospect of ending therapy may trigger clients’ schemas. Allow time to discuss previous endings, identifying any unmet needs (e.g.
clients may have felt abandoned and uncared for because they felt their previous therapist did not take the ending seriously). They may need
your help to enable them to draw on their Healthy Adult mode to meet their Vulnerable Child’s concerns about the ending. The following is
a list of some ways to help make ending therapy a healing experience.

+ Inviting clients to contact you with occasional updates (if they would like to) after you have stopped meeting (if possible within your
service context);

+ Suggesting they summon you (e.g. in imagery) to help when they miss you;

+ Expressing your feelings about ending, holding in mind the particular needs of their Vulnerable Child mode's particular schema needs (e.g.

‘I will miss you too, I'm honoured to have had the chance to work with you.’);

+ Writing an ending letter summarising your work together and giving key reparenting messages to help them to hold onto the work.
Closing comments
ST provides a model for formulating complex problems that incorporates relational, cognitive and behavioural perspectives. Through a
range of methods, it aims to help clients heal their schemas, modify or diminish maladaptive coping and toxic parent modes, and strengthen
their Healthy Adult mode in order to allow their core emotional needs to be met in adaptive ways, both within their relationships and


through effective self-care. Many clients and therapists are drawn to the model because it allows for an emotionally healing experience, has a
clear, transparent structure and provides strategies for deep and sustained change. There is growing evidence for its effectiveness and much
activity developing the model for use in a range of client populations.

Exercise

Using the following case example of Dave, conduct an assessment interview as described in the chapter and develop a schema formulation
of his difficulties.

Case example: Dave

Presenting Problem: Lack of social connection and close peer relationships.

Life Pattern: Dave is 22 years old and has always ‘put up a front’ in a way that forms a barrier to people getting close to him. His strong
competitive drive keeps him from showing any vulnerability, or even engaging in social and ‘frivolous’ (his word) activities that his peers
enjoy. Rather, he prefers to work and so he remains lonely and has a poor sense of belonging. Keeping a very close relationship with his
protective, idealised parents seems preferable to Dave and diminishes his motivation to make friends or socialise. He therefore continues to
feel disconnected and childlike compared to them, which contributes to a lack of social confidence that leads to further social avoidance. He
opened up to one friend, Ed, whom he admires, and feels out of control now that he has let him in.

Therapy Goal: To feel more, ‘equal’ and, ‘myself’ and less anxious in friendships with peers.

Note
* Equal co-authors


